Referring words66
A Text-referring words
Text-referring words take their meaning from the surrounding text. For example, this sentence in
isolation does not mean much: ‘We decided to look at the problem again and try to find a solution.’
What problem? The words problem and solution help organise the argument of the text, but they do
not tell us the topic of the text. They refer to something somewhere else.
Here are some examples. The word in bold refers to the underlined words.
Pollution is increasing. The problem is getting worse each day.
Should taxes be raised or lowered? This was the biggest issue in the election. [topic causing great
argument and controversy]
Whether the war could have been avoided is a question that interests historians.
Let’s discuss crime. That’s always an interesting topic. [subject to argue about or discuss, e.g. in a debate
or in an essay]
Punishment is only one aspect of crime. [part of the topic]
B Problem-solution words
Text-referring words are often used with ‘problem-solution’types of text, where a problem is
presented and ways of solving it are discussed. In the following example, the words in bold concern a
problem or a solution. Try to learn these words as a family.
The situation in our cities with regard to economies. Unless a new approach is found to
traffic is going from bad to worse. Congestion control traffic, we will never find a solution to
is a daily feature of urban life. The problem the dilemma.
is now beginning to affect our national
In the dialogue below, two politicians are arguing. Note how the words in bold refer to parts of the
argument.
A: Your claim that we’re doing B: But the investment has all
nothing to invest in industry is gone to service industries.
false. We invested £10 billion last The real point is that we need
year. You’ve ignored this fact. to invest in our manufacturing
industries.
A: That argument is out-of-
date in a modern technological
society. Our position has always B: But that view won’thelp
been that we should encourage to reduce unemployment.
technology.
The following problem-solution words are grouped in families associated with the underlined key
words. The prepositions normally used with them are given in brackets.
situation: state of affairs, position (with regard to)
problem: difficulty (more formal), crisis, matter
response (to): reaction (to), attitude (to), approach (to)
solution: answer (to), resolution (to), key (to), way out (of )
evaluation (of the solution): assessment, judgment
Economically, the government is in a situation was to impose higher taxes.
critical position. This state of affairs is This approach has not proved to be the
partly a result of the financial difficulties solution to the problem. Economists’
currently being experienced globally. current assessment is that this may in fact
Our government’s initial response to the be making matters worse.
138 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
66.1 Match the sentences on the left with a suitable label on the right.
1 The earth is in orbit around the sun. c a problem
2 It has proved to be most efficient. b evaluation
3 People are essentially good. c fact
4 I’ve run out of cash. d belief
5 World poverty and overpopulation. e view
6 They should get married, to my mind. f issue
66.2 Fill the gaps with an appropriate word to refer to the underlined parts of the sentences.
1 So you were talking about animal rights? That’s quite a big issue nowadays.
2 We are running out of funds. How do you propose we should deal with the ?
3 Is there life on other planets? This is a nobody has yet been able to answer.
4 (teacher to the class) You can write your essay on ‘My best holiday ever’. If you don’tlike that
, I’llgive you another one.
5 She thinks we should all fly around in tiny little helicopters. This to the traffic problem in
cities is rather new and unusual. I wonder if it is viable?
66.3 These newspaper headlines have been separated from their texts. Put each one with a
suitable text extract.
a NEW APPROACH TO b NEW ARGUMENT OVER c SCIENTIST REJECTS
CANCER TREATMENT ECONOMIC RECESSION CLAIMS OVER FAST FOOD
d PRIME MINISTER SETS OUT e SOLUTION TO AGE-OLD f SITUATION IN SAHEL
VIEWS ON NATO MYSTERY IN KENYA WORSENING DAILY
1 she said if the world 2 tests were being carried 3 there was no proof at
community failed to out to see if the new drug all that such things
respond, thousands of really did work were harmful, and in
children could die
f
4 the bones proved beyond 5 also said that he believed 6 the Minister denied that
doubt that human beings that most people had a this was true and said
had inhabited the region similar vision of instead that the evidence
during pointed to
66.4 Over to you
1 What aspect of your work/studies do you find most interesting?
2 Have you ever faced a dilemma? What was it? What was your response to the situation?
3 Can you think of an argument in favour of single-sex schools and an argument against? What are
your own views on this issue?
4 What would you say is the main problem facing your country at the moment? Can you suggest a
solution to this problem?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 139
