Making uncountable nouns countable86
A Bit and piece
You can make many uncountable nouns singular and countable by adding a piece of or a (little) bit of.
Similarly, you can make such nouns plural with pieces of or bits of. Bit is less formal than piece and
they are not always interchangeable. Bit can be used with all types of nouns. Piece tends to be used
more with uncountable nouns. Bit suggests a smaller amount than piece.
How many pieces of luggage have you got with you?
The police collected bits of information from different sources.
Chopin wrote some wonderful pieces of music.
Before you go to England I should give you two bits of advice ...
He spends all his money buying new bits of computer equipment.
Common mistakes
We say: What an attractive piece of furniture! (NOT What an attractive furniture!)
Words that go with specific uncountable nounsB
Weather
FORECAST
rain sun lightning wind
Today’s weather will be variable. In the north there are likely to be heavy showers (of rain).
The sunny spell (of weather) that we have had this last week will continue in much of the south
although there may be occasional rumbles of thunder and flashes of lightning in some areas
with some quite loud claps of thunder in one or two areas. These will be followed by a few
spots of rain but gusts of wind should soon blow them away and the sunshine will then return.
See Unit 6 for more weather words.
Groceries
‘Ineed a loaf of bread, a couple of slices of ham, two bars of chocolate, a tube of toothpaste, two
cartons of milk and three bars of soap.’(slice can also be used with toast, bread, meat and cheese)
Nature
Look at the ladybird on that blade of grass!
What’s happened? Look at that cloud of smoke hanging over the town!
We could see little puffs of smoke coming out of the volcano.
Let’s go out and get a breath of fresh air.
Put another lump of coal on the fire, please. (lump can also be used with sugar)
Other words
I had an amazing stroke of luck this morning.
I’ve never seen him do a stroke of work. (only in negative sentences, more emphatic than a
bit of work)
I’ve never seen him in such a fit of temper before.
The donkey is the basic means of transport on the island.
Jeans must be the most useful article/item of clothing ever invented.
There was an interesting item of news about France on TV last night.
C A state of
Nouns used with a state of are usually abstract and include chaos, tension, confusion, health,
disorder, uncertainty, poverty, agitation, disrepair and flux [continuous change], e.g. The transport
system is in a state of chaos.
178 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
86.1 Match the words on the left with the words they collocate with on the right.
1 a stroke h a lightning
2 a shower b coal
3 an article c grass
4 a lump of d news
5 a flash e rain
6 a blade f clothing
7 an item g thunder
8 a rumble h luck
86.2 Change the uncountable nouns to countable nouns in the following sentences by using
piece, bit or one of the more specific words from B.
1 Could you buy me some bread, please? Could you buy me a loaf of bread, please?
2 My mother gave me some advice that I have always remembered.
3 Suddenly the wind almost blew him off his feet.
4 We had some terribly windy weather last winter.
5 Would you like some more toast?
6 He never does any work at all in the house.
7 Let’s go to the park - I need some fresh air.
8 I can give you some important information about that.
9 We could see smoke hovering over the city from a long way away.
10 I need to get some furniture for my flat.
86.3 Use words from C opposite to fit the clues for the puzzle below.
1 21 The reforms mean that the country’s education system is in F L U X
a state of at the moment but hopefully things
will soon settle down. 3
2 We are still in a state of as to who has won the
election.
43 The country’s infrastructure is in a state of
after the earthquake.
4 We fell in love with the house although it was in a dreadful 5
state of
5 My granny wouldn’tbe in such a bad state of
now if she hadn’tsmoked all her life.
66 Although this is supposed to be an affluent society, many
people are still living in a state of
86.4 Over to you
Make up sentence clues like those in 86.3 to match this puzzle.
1 2F L A S H
R
3S T R O K E
I
4
C L A P
L
5B R E A T H
S
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 179
