Proverbs98
A Advice and warnings
proverb paraphrase
Don’tcount your chickens before they hatch. Don’tdepend on something happening, because it
may not.
Don’tput all your eggs in one basket. Don’tinvest all your efforts or attention in just one
thing.
Never judge a book by its cover. Don’tjudge people/things by their outward
appearance.
Never look a gift-horse in the mouth. Never refuse good fortune when it is there in front
of you.
Take care of the pennies and the pounds will take Take care of small sums of money and they will
care of themselves. become large sums.
We’llcross that bridge when we come to it. We’lldeal with that problem when it actually
happens.
B Key elements
Proverbs can be grouped by key elements, for example, animals and birds.
When the cat’s away, the mice will play. [people will take advantage of someone else’s absence to behave
more freely]
You can lead a horse to water but you can’tmake it drink. [you can try to persuade
someone, but you can’tforce them]
One swallow doesn’tmake a summer. [one positive sign does not mean that all will
be well; a swallow is a bird that returns to Britain in late spring]
C Visualising
As with learning all vocabulary, visualising an element of it often helps.
There’s no smoke without fire. / Where People who live in glass houses shouldn’t
there’s smoke, there’s fire. [rumours are throw stones. [don’tcriticise others’faults if
usually based on some degree of truth] you suffer from them yourself]
Too many cooks spoil the broth /brɒθ/.
[too many people interfering is a bad way of Many hands make light work. [a lot of
doing things; broth = a kind of soup] people helping makes a job easier]
Language help
Speakers tend to use proverbs to comment on a situation, often at the end of a true story someone
has told, or in response to some event.
202 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
98.1 Find proverbs on the opposite page that you could use in these situations.
1 Someone says they have just been offered a free two-week holiday, but are
hesitating whether to take up the offer. Never look a gift-horse in the mouth.
2 Someone thanks you and your friends for helping to load heavy boxes into a van.
3 Someone says they can’tbe bothered applying to different universities and will just apply to one.
4 Three different people have made different arrangements for the same meeting, and so everyone
comes at different times and the result is total confusion.
5 Someone is worried about a journey you are making with them and keeps saying things like ‘What’ll
happen if the plane is delayed?’, ‘What’llwe do if our luggage gets lost?’
98.2 Answer these questions about the proverbs on the opposite page. Give an explanation for
your answer.
1 Another common proverb is All that glitters is not gold. Which proverb has a similar meaning? Never
judge a book by its cover. They both warn against trusting how something looks.
2 Which proverb has an opposite meaning to Many hands make light work?
3 Another common proverb is Absence makes the heart grow fonder. Which proverb has an opposite
meaning?
4 Which two proverbs warn against anticipating the future?
5 Another common proverb is A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush. Which proverb has a similar
meaning?
98.3 People often refer to proverbs by only saying half of them and leaving the rest for the
listener to ‘fill in’. Complete the proverbs in these dialogues.
1 A: Joel’s always criticising people who are selfish, yet he’s terribly selfish himself.
shouldn't throw stones.B: Yes, well, people who live in glass houses ...
A: Exactly.
2 A: The people in the office have been playing computer games all day since the boss fell ill.
B: Well, you know what they say: when the cat’s away ...
A: Right, and they’re currently doing that.
3 A: I didn’tbelieve those rumours about Nick and Tara, but apparently they are seeing each other.
B: You shouldn’tbe so naive, you know what they say, where there’s
smoke ...
A: Mm, I suppose you’re right.
4 A: Amazing, he’s made a fortune from just one little shop!
B: Well, I think it’s a case of take care of the pennies ...
A: Sure, he’s always been very careful with his money.
98.4 What proverbs do these pictures make you think of?
2 3 41 One swallow doesn't
make a summer.
98.5 Over to you
Try translating some proverbs word for word from your language into English. Then, if you can, ask a
native speaker if they can tell you an English proverb with the same or a similar meaning.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 203
