Addition65
A Expressions for linking sentences/clauses
sentence/clause 1 and sentence/clause 2
For this job you need a degree. In addition, you need at least two years’
Additionally, experience.
Smartphones are becoming more Furthermore, Moreover, they are becoming cheaper.
sophisticated. What’s more*,
Children should respect their parents. Equally, they should respect their
Likewise, teachers.
We’ll have all the stress of going to On top of (all) that**, we’ll have to pay the lawyers’
court and giving evidence. bills.
* furthermore and moreover are normally interchangeable, and are both rather formal; what’s more is
informal; what is more is rather formal.
** emphatic: used mostly in informal spoken English.
You can also use plus, e.g. To keep fit you need a good diet plus (you need) regular exercise. (normally
used to connect noun phrases, but can connect clauses in informal speech)
Expressions at the end of sentences/clausesB
They sell chairs, tables, beds, and so on /etˈsetrə/. (and so on is more informal than etc.)
It’llgo to the committee, then to the board, then to another committee, and so on and so forth.
[suggests a long continuation; infml]
He was a good sportsman and an excellent musician into the bargain / to boot. [emphasises the
combination of items; infml]
Expressions that begin, or come in the middle of, sentences/clausesC
Further to my telephone call to you yesterday, I am now
writing to ... (formal opening for a letter or email)
In addition to winning the gold medal, she also broke the
world record.
In addition to his BA in History, he has a PhD in Sociology.
(fairly formal)
Alongside her full-time job as a dentist, she does
voluntary conservation work at weekends.
I have to go to the bank today, as well as getting
my hair cut.
Besides / Apart from having a salary, he also has
a private income.
Apart from her many other hobbies, she restores
old racing cars.
Jo Evans was there, along with / together with a
few other people who I didn’tknow.
Language help
The words and expressions in C are followed by nouns, noun phrases, or a verb plus -ing, e.g. As well
as speaking Japanese, she also speaks French. (NOT As well as she speaks Japanese, she also speaks
French.)
136 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
65.1 Fill in the gaps in this email with suitable addition words and phrases. Try to do it
without looking at the opposite page.
Dear Mrs Coldstream,
1 Further to my letter of 16 March, I should like to give you more information concerning my qualifications
and experience. 2 holding a Diploma in Catering, I also have an Advanced Certificate in
Hotel Management. The course covered the usual areas: finance, front services, publicity, space allocation3 . I also wish to point out that 4 holding these qualifications, I have now been
working in the hotel trade for five years. 5 , my experience prior to that was also connected
with tourism and hospitality. I hope you will give my application due consideration.
Yours sincerely,
Gemma Weaver
Rewrite the sentences using the word or phrase in brackets at the end.65.2
1 Physical labour can exhaust the body very quickly. Excessive study can rapidly reduce mental powers
too. (equally) Physical labour can exhaust the body very quickly. Equally, excessive study can rapidly reduce mental
powers.
2 My cousin turned up and some schoolmates of his came with him. (along with)
3 He owns a big chemical factory and he runs a massive oil business in the USA. (as well as)
4 I’m their scientific adviser and act as a consultant to the Managing Director. (addition)
5 It was raining and getting dark. We also had very little petrol left in the tank. (top)
6 He’s a very good singer. He has a degree in music. (more)
Correct the mistakes in the use of addition words and phrases in these sentences.65.3
being1 I work part-time as well as I am a student, so I have a busy life.
2 Besides to have a good job, my ambition is to meet someone nice to share my life with.
3 Alongside I have many other responsibilities, I now have to be in charge of staff training.
4 In addition has a degree, she also has a diploma.
5 Likewise my father won’tagree, my mother’s sure to find something to object to.
6 To boot she’s a good footballer, she’s a good athlete.
7 He said he’d have to first consider the organisation, then the system, then the finance and so forth so on.
What addition words/phrases can you associate with these pictures?65.4
boot1 to 2 into the 3 in 4 on
65.5 Rewrite this text using alternatives to ‘and’ and the words in bold and as many
expressions from the opposite page as possible.
plusTo become a successful athlete you will need to be fit and you will need to train hard every day. And
you will need a very special type of determination and stamina. And you will need support from friends
and family, financial support and other things. And a good coach will help a great deal, motivating you
and setting goals for you. And with all those other things you will need that indefinable thing: talent.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 137
