Formal and informal words 296
A Monosyllabic informal words
Informal versions of words are often short and monosyllabic (consist of one syllable).
The cops have arrived. [police]
The house has two loos. [toilets]
It cost me ten quid. [pounds]
I’llhelp you peel the spuds. [potatoes]
My bike’s been stolen. [bicycle]
I always go by tube. [word used for the London Underground]
His dad spent ten years in the nick. [prison]
I’llget a cab from the station. [taxi]
B Clippings
Shortening a word tends to make it less formal, though these forms are acceptable in a wide range of
contexts.
I’llmeet you in the lab(oratory).
She works for a tech(nology) company.
What’s on telly tonight? [television]
Have you seen that mag(azine)?
We should put an ad(vertisement) / an advert(isement) in the (news)paper.
Can I use your mobile (phone)? I need to (tele)phone my brother.
There’s milk in the fridge. [refrigerator]
Her sister’s a vet(erinary surgeon).
Would you like to be a celeb(rity)? [famous person]
C Slang
Slang is extremely informal language. Slang helps to make speech vivid, colourful and interesting but
it can easily be used inappropriately. Slang is mainly used in speech but it is also often found in the
popular press and in literature. Slang changes very quickly, so some words go out of fashion, but you
may meet them in novels and films. Some slang expressions may cause offence to some people. Here
are some examples you may hear or read.
Expressions for money: dosh readies moolah
Expressions for food and drinks: nosh grub sarnie [sandwich] cuppa [cup of tea]
People obsessed with computers or other equipment: nerd geek anorak
Jobs: quack [doctor] shrink [psychiatrist] the old bill [the police] squaddie [soldier of a low rank]
Language help
If you are interested in slang, you can find more examples in films or in the tabloid press but it is
probably safest to keep it in your passive rather than your active vocabulary.
198 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
96.1 Make this conversation more informal by changing some of the words. Refer to the
opposite page if necessary.
JIM: Annie, can you lend me ten pounds? quid
ANNIE: What for?
JIM: I’ve got to go and see my parents, and my bicycle’s not working, so I’llhave to get a taxi.
ANNIE: Can’tyou telephone them and say you can’tcome?
JIM: Well, I could, but my mobile phone’s not working, and I want to go because they always have
lots of food, and the refrigerator at our flat is empty, as usual.
ANNIE: Can’tyou go by underground? Anyway, you’re in luck, I’ve got some money, so here you are.
96.2 Replace the underlined words with more formal equivalents.
soldiers1 The train was full of squaddies going home for the weekend.
2 I’ve got a bad stomach ache - I think I’llmake an appointment with the quack.
3 He spent two years in the nick for stealing cars.
4 The cops arrived shortly after the accident.
5 There’llbe plenty of nosh at the party so we don’tneed to eat beforehand.
6 He’s quite a celeb in the world of poetry.
7 I’m dying for a cuppa. I haven’thad one since breakfast.
8 I’d love to get a motorbike but I just don’thave the moolah.
Replace the informal words in these sentences with more formal words.96.3
advertisements1 (formal email) I should like to enquire about the cost of ads on your website.
2 (exam essay) The Internet and telly are probably the biggest influences on young people today.
3 (recipe in a cookery book) Next, slice the spuds and place them on top of the meat.
4 (exam essay) Papers face stiff competition these days from TV and internet news.
5 (formal university publicity) The Faculty offers courses in vet science. Lab facilities are available 24
hours a day.
96.4 Another way of making informal words is by using short forms ending in -y or -ie. Can you
work out the meanings of the following underlined words?
breakfast1 Let’s have brekkie before we leave tomorrow.
2 It’s a nice day. Let’s have a barbie and eat in the garden.
3 D’you want a biccy with your coffee?
4 Jenny turned up at the party with her new hubby.
5 Oh, let me see your holiday piccies! ... Is that you in the big
straw hat?
6 They serve really nice veggie food.
He’s a brickie.
96.5 Over to you
Which English words do you know that are very informal or are slang? Where did you read or hear
them? If possible, compare with a friend or classmate.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 199
