Talking and communicating69 Wow!
A Idioms connected with communication problems She’s in love
with me!
So, see you then. Monday
Friday
I really like
you as a
friend.Yes.
They’re talking at cross-purposes. [talking He’s got the wrong end of the stick. [not
about different things without realising it] understood something in the correct way]
... and that ... notwithstanding anyCan ... means ... other proviso not stated ...
... but if not,Er ... it could be ...
... and anotherWhy ... thing ...
She can’tget a word in edgeways /edʒweɪz/. [doesn’tget He can’tmake head or tail of what she’sa chance to speak because others are talking so much] saying. [cannot understand at all]
B Good talk, bad talk
The boss always talks down to us. [talks as if we were inferior]
My workmates are always talking behind my back. [saying negative things about me when I’m not there]
It was just small talk, nothing more, I promise. [purely social talk, nothing serious]
Let’s sit somewhere else; they always talk shop over lunch, and it bores me rigid. [talk about work]
Hey! Your new friend’s become a real talking point among the staff! Did you know? [subject that
everyone wants to talk about]
It’s gone too far this time. I shall have to give him a talking to. [reproach/scold him / tell him off]
C Talk in discussions, meetings, etc.
8Alex is so1 long-winded.Who’s going to start the ball rolling?
/ˈlɒŋˈwɪndɪd/
2 To put it in a nutshell,
7this is a waste of time. Sophie always
talks rubbish.3 I hope they
get to the
point soon.
6I hope Will4 I want to speak speaks; he always5my mind today. I hope we wrap talks sense.
up the discussion
by 12.30.
1 start the discussion 2 say it in few words 3 come to the important part of the matter
4 say exactly what I think 5 finish the discussion 6 says intelligent, reasonable things
7 says stupid things 8 says things in a long, indirect way
144 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
69.1 Look at these dialogues and comment on them.
1 PAUL: £98 for a meal! That’s outrageous!
EMMA: Not the meal, you idiot! The room!
Emma and Paul seem to be .talking at cross-purposes
2 JO: So that’s what I’m going to do, take it all away.
MEENA: What about -
JO: And if they don’tlike it they can just go and do what they like.
MEENA: If she -
JO: Not that I have to consult them, anyway; I’m in charge round here.
It seems that Meena can’tget .
3 VOLODYA: I got very upset when you said I was childish.
GINA: I didn’t!I just said you seemed to get on very well with the children. Honestly.
VOLODYA: Oh, I see. Oh, sorry.
It seems that Volodya got the .
4 DAN: So, area-wise the down-matching sales profile commitment would seem to be
high-staked on double-par.
KIM: Eh? Could you say that again? You’ve got me there.
It seems that Kim can’t what Dan is saying.
5 ALI: I don’texpect someone with your intelligence to understand this document.
JUAN: Oh.
Ali seems to be talking to Juan.
69.2 What idioms opposite do these drawings represent?
1 wrap up the discussion 2 talk 3 start
4 get to / come to 5 to put 6 get hold of
69.3 Fill the gaps to complete the sentences.
speaks1 She is very direct and always her mind.
2 He gets bored quickly with small and always wants to get down to serious matters.
3 The boss gave me a real to after that stupid mistake I made.
4 You’re behind the times! George's girlfriend was last week’s point.
5 Paula’s uncle is so long- - it takes him ten minutes to make a point that anyone else
could make in 30 seconds.
6 It was such a relief when James got up to speak - at last someone was talking .
7 I hate going out with my boyfriend and his work colleagues - they spend all evening
talking .
8 You should tell him what you think to his face rather than talking behind his .
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 145
