29 Medicine and technology
A history of health technologyA
Ancient Egypt The earliest crutches were in use.
Spectacles1, probably invented by Arab scientists, were usedMiddle Ages
to correct vision2.
The first wheelchairs were developed.1500-1600
1804: the first general anaesthetic3 was used in an1800-1900
operation in Japan.
1896: X-rays4 were first used in medicine.
The first contact lenses5 were manufactured6.1960-1970
1 a more formal word for glasses 2 the ability to see 3 something used to make
you unconscious when you have an operation, so that you do not feel any pain
4 a type of radiation that makes possible photographs (also called ‘X-rays’) of hidden
5 a small piece of transparentobjects such as bones and organs in the body
6 made inplastic which is worn on the surface of your eye to improve your sight
large numbers, usually in a factory
The present dayB
Medical technology has made rapid1 advances2 in recent decades3.
Nowadays, a vast4 range of devices5 is available: people with hearing
difficulties wear sophisticated6 hearing aids7; people with heart problems
wear tiny pacemakers8. Artificial9 hips10 and knees are common, and are
highly11 efficient. People who have lost an arm or a leg can have a prosthetic12
leg or a modern robotic13 arm and hand, which they can use to pick things up
like a natural hand. Eyesight problems can be corrected by laser surgery14.
1 very fast 2 improvements or developments 3 a period of 10 years 4 very
5 object or machine made for a particular purpose 6 clever in a complicatedwide
7 a small device put inside someone’s ear toway and able to do complicated tasks
8 a small device put inside someone’s chest to help their hearthelp them hear better
9 not natural, a copy made by humans 10 the joint which connectsbeat correctly
11 very (more formal) 12 made to replace athe leg to the upper part of the body
13 able to be controlled and moved by the usermissing arm or leg
14 medical operations using powerful narrow beams of light
The futureC
A recent TV documentary predicted the following developments in medical technology.
• Scanners which can identify health problems at an early stage1 will become more and
more sophisticated.
• Diagnosing2 illnesses from a distance. Patients will sit at their home computers, describe
their symptoms and send information automatically to their doctor (for example,
their blood pressure3 or body temperature) using instruments such as thermometers
connected to their computer.
• Computers and huge databases will provide doctors with more and more information and
the tools4 to treat diseases.
• Keyhole surgery5 will become more common. It will not be necessary to cut open a
person’s body to operate on them.
1 during the first period of development 2 name the exact character of a disease or a problem, by examining it3 measure of the strength at which the blood flows through the body 4 something that helps you do something
5 medical operations in which a very small hole is made in a person’s body to reach the organ or tissue inside
64 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
29.1 Look at A opposite and answer the questions about medical technology.
glasses1 What did Arab scientists probably invent? (two answers, one more formal)
2 What began to be used in 1896 to enable doctors to take photographs of the inside of
people’s bodies?
3 How did the ancient Egyptians help disabled people to walk?
4 What alternative to glasses became popular in the 1960s and 1970s?
5 How could disabled people move around as early as 1500 to 1600?
29.2 Rewrite the words in bold using words from A and B opposite.
manufactured1 Medical scanners are made at this factory.
2 Glasses were invented to correct problems with eyesight .
3 Technology for medicine has made very fast progress
in the last ten years .
4 There is now a large number of things that make
life better for people with medical problems.
5 Copies of natural hips are very efficient.
6 Some disabled athletes can run as fast as able-bodied ones using legs.
7 Scientists are working on arms that can be controlled directly by the person’s brain.
29.3 Using words from the opposite page, say what each object is for.
1 a device for people with 2 3
hearing difficulties
5 64
29.4 Complete the missing words. You are given the first letter(s). A preposition is missing in
sentence 3. Add it.
dentify1 Doctors will be able to i diseases at an early s in the future using
sophisticated sc .
2 Doctors will be able to d a patient’s illness from a distance. Patients will send
information a to their doctor.
3 K s means doctors no longer need to open a patient’s body when they
operate them.
4 Information on large computer d will help doctors t diseases and give
them new t to cure illnesses.
29.5 Over to you
Have you used or experienced any of the examples of medical technology mentioned in this unit?
How? When? Write true sentences.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 65
