The six senses46
A The five senses
The five senses are sight, hearing, taste, touch and smell. What is sometimes referred to as a ‘sixth
sense’(or extrasensory perception) is a power to be aware of things independently of the five physical
senses - a kind of supernatural sense. The five verbs referring to the senses are modified by an
adjective rather than an adverb.
He looks dreadful. The trip sounds marvellous. The cake tastes good. It felt strange.
The soup smelt delicious.
B Sight
Yesterday I glanced out of the window and noticed
a policeman observing a house opposite through
binoculars. I thought I glimpsed a man inside the house.
Then I saw that there was a man peering into the window
of the same house. I gazed at them wondering what they
were doing. Suddenly the policeman stopped staring
through his binoculars. He went to arrest the other man
as he started to climb into the house through the window.
I realised that I had witnessed a crime.
C Hearing
Scale of loudness:
noiseless silent quiet noisy loud deafening
D Taste
sweet (honey) salty (crisps) bitter (strong coffee) sour (vinegar) spicy (Indian food)
If you say something tastes hot it may mean spicy rather than not cold. If a curry, say, is not
particularly hot, then it is mild. Food can be tasty, but tasteful refers to furnishings, architecture or a
style of dressing or behaviour. The opposite of both is tasteless.
E Touch
She poked me in the ribs with her elbow to wake me up. He stroked the cat and patted
the dog. She tapped him on the shoulder. He grasped my hand and we ran. She grabbed
her phone and ran to the bus stop. The thief snatched her handbag and disappeared into the
crowd. Press the button. Please handle the goods with great care.
F Smell
Here are some adjectives to describe smells:
Very unpleasant: stinking foul-smelling putrid musty [smelling unpleasantly old and slightly
damp] pungent [smelling very strong, often unpleasantly so]
Pleasant: fragrant aromatic sweet-smelling perfumed/scented
G Sixth sense
Different phenomena which a person with a sixth sense may experience:
telepathy [experiencing someone else’s feelings even though you are apart]
premonition [knowing something is going to happen before it occurs]
intuition [instinctive understanding]
déjà vu [an inexplicable feeling that you have already been somewhere or experienced something before]
98 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
46.1 Which of the verbs in the text in B opposite suggests looking in the following ways
1 as a crime or accident occurs? witness 4 quickly?
2 closely, finding it hard to make things 5 fixedly?
out? 6 at something but getting only
3 in a scientific kind of way? a brief view?
46.2 Are the following best described as sweet, salty, bitter, sour, spicy or hot?
1 strong, unsweetened coffee 3 chilli powder 5 Indian cooking
bitter 4 lime 6 sea water
2 chocolate cake
46.3 Which of the adjectives in F best describes for you the smell of the following?
aromatic1 herbs in a kitchen 5 a shed full of goats
2 old socks 6 a beauty salon
3 out-of-date eggs 7 a loft used for storage
4 roses 8 a skunk
46.4 Replace the underlined words with a more precise verb from the opposite page.
patted1 I touched the dog a few times. 6 He touched the cat affectionately.
2 He knocked lightly on the door.
3 She took my hand firmly. 7 The robber took the money and ran.
4 She put her face very close up to the window
so she could see better. 8 She picked up, carried and put down the boxes
5 Take care you don’thit anyone in the eye with carefully.
your umbrella.
46.5 Make a sentence about the situations using any of these verbs - look, sound, taste, feel,
smell - plus an adjective.
1 You see a film about the Rocky Mountains. They look magnificent.
2 You come downstairs in the morning and smell fresh coffee.
3 A friend has just had her hair cut.
4 You hear the latest number one song.
5 A friend, an excellent cook, tries a new soup recipe.
6 A friend asks how you feel today.
7 A little boy asks you to listen to his first attempts at the piano.
8 You see a friend of yours with a very worried look on her face.
46.6 Write sentences using each of the nine verbs in bold in B in ways that illustrate their
specific meanings as clearly as possible.
EXAMPLE Laura hoped her boss wouldn't notice her glancing at her watch every few minutes.
46.7 Over to you
Answer these questions about yourself.
1 What’s your favourite smell?
2 Do you prefer a hot curry or a mild curry?
3 What materials do you like the feel of?
4 Do you believe that some people have a sixth sense?
5 Have you ever had a feeling of déjà vu?
6 Have you ever had a telepathic experience?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 99
