Expressions with do and make89
A Phrasal verbs with do and make
phrasal verb meaning example
do without manage without We’ll have to do without a holiday this year as
money is so short.
do away with abolish, get rid of It should be our ambition to do away with
poverty in the world.
make for move in the direction of Let’s make for the city centre and look for a
restaurant there.
make of think (opinion) What do you make of the new software?
make off leave hurriedly He made off as soon as he heard their car turn
into the drive.
make up for compensate for The superb food at the hotel made up for the
uncomfortable rooms.
B Meanings of phrasal verbs
Some phrasal verbs have a number of different meanings, e.g. do up can mean not only ‘fasten’but
also ‘renovate’and ‘putinto a bundle’. Similarly, make out can mean ‘claim’, ‘manage to see’and
‘understand’;make up can mean ‘compose’or ‘invent’;it can also mean ‘constitute’or ‘form’, ‘put
cosmetics on’, ‘prepare by mixing together various ingredients’and ‘make something more numerous
or complete’.
C Collocations with do and make
There are a lot of other common collocations based on do and make. Note that most combinations
referring to activities, work or duty use do whereas those which lead to an end product (e.g. tea, a
cake, a noise, a toy boat, a profit) use make.
You do: your homework / the housework / some gardening /
exercise / the washing-up / your best / the shopping /
the cooking / business with ... , and so on.
You make: a cup of tea / arrangements / an agreement / a
suggestion / a decision / war / an attempt / a phone call / the
best of ... / an effort / an excuse / a mistake / a profit / a loss /
love / the most of / a noise / a good or bad impression /
a success of ... / allowances for ... 1 / a gesture / a face / fun of ... /
a fuss of ... 2 / a go (a success) of ... , and so on.
1 consider someone’s situation and not judge them harshly
2 give someone a lot of attention and treat them well
Common mistakes
We say: When I do my homework, I try not to make too many mistakes. (NOT When I make my
homework, I try not to do too many mistakes.)
184 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
89.1 Here are some different ways in which do up, make up and make out can be used. What is
the meaning of the phrasal verb in each case?
prepare it so you can use it1 Take this prescription to the chemist and she’llmake it up for you.
2 Can you make out the little white house on the mountain side?
3 A human being is made up of many, often conflicting, desires.
4 The present was beautifully done up in gold paper.
5 I just can’tmake Joe out. He’s so strange.
6 Let’s advertise the talk and hope we make up the numbers a bit.
7 He made out that he had never loved anyone else. She believed him.
8 We’re planning to do up our bathroom at the weekend. It’s looking rather old and dull.
89.2 Add the necessary prepositions or particles to complete this story.
upLast weekend we decided to start doing 1 our bedroom. We agreed that we could do
2 the old fireplace in the corner. As we began to remove it from the wall we found
some old photographs done 3 in a bundle behind a loose brick. At first we could not
make 4 what they were but we wiped them clean and realised they were all of the
same young man. We spent an enjoyable evening making 5 stories to explain why the
pictures had been hidden.
89.3 In each sentence below, there is an error with choice of particle. Correct the mistakes.
away
1 I’m going to do out with my old laptop and buy a new one. It’s too old and too slow.
2 This weekend we are planning to make to the seaside.
3 Vast amounts of money do not always make of happiness.
4 Your shoelaces are untied. Do them in or you’lltrip over.
5 They like to make away that they are very important people.
6 Thieves robbed the bank and made out with £1,000,000.
89.4 Complete the following sentences using an appropriate expression from C.
WAR1 Pacifist posters in the 1960s used to say ‘MAKELOVE NOT !’
2 It doesn’tmatter if you pass the exam or not, as long as you do
3 Companies that once made a huge are now going bankrupt.
4 I don’tlike doing but someone has to clean, wash, iron and cook!
5 You must make the fact that he’s only seven years old.
6 Dressing smartly for an interview helps you to make
7 Her company does a lot of in East Asia selling educational software.
8 Do you do much ? Yes, I go to the gym three times a week.
89.5 Over to you
Which of these things do you think you could do without and why?
mobile phone TV sunglasses laptop or tablet
How often do you do the shopping, the cooking, the washing-up?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 185
