34 Computers
Hardware [computer equipment or machinery]
personal computer / PC / desktop computer: a computer that fits on a desk, used by individuals at
work or at home
laptop (computer): a lightweight portable computer that usually fits in a briefcase
tablet: a portable personal computer operated by a touch screen
hard disk: a device [piece of equipment] inside a computer that stores large amounts of information
disk drive: a device that allows information to be read from a disk
scanner: device for transferring pictures and texts into a computer
memory stick: a small device that lets you carry computer data anywhere conveniently; you can
then plug the stick into any machine
RAM (random access memory / memory): the memory available on a computer to store and use
information temporarily; can be measured in gigabytes
(micro) chip: a very small piece of semiconductor, especially in a computer, that contains extremely
small electronic circuits and devices, and can perform particular operations
network: when a number of computers, for example in one office, are connected together
(or networked) so that they can share information
Software [computer programs that you install]
An application is a piece of software designed for a specific purpose. This is often shortened to app.
You can get mobile phone apps for all sorts of things these days.
word-processing: writing and storing printed text on a computer
spreadsheet (program): a program, or the grid you create with it, to perform mathematical
operations
database: a large amount of information stored in a computer system in such a way that it can be
easily looked at or changed
(computer) graphics: pictures, images and symbols that you can form on a computer
virus: hidden instructions in a program designed to destroy information
display: what you see on the screen of an electronic device
A computer shows a range of icons on its display. You put the cursor on the one you want to use and
click on it to open it.
Some computing verbs
A
B
C
You probably store a lot of important information on
your computer. So, it’s sensible to back up all your
files on a regular basis. Then it’llbe less of a problem
if you delete something accidentally or if your
computer crashes.
A particularly useful feature of most applications is
the one that allows you to undo what you have just
done – just click on Undo and it’s quick and easy to
correct anything that you have keyed in by mistake.
After a few years you may want to upgrade your
computer as they are always developing machines
which are faster and more powerful. If you don’t
do this you may not be able to run all the software
you need. You can usually just download upgrades
to your computer’s operating system or to your
applications from company websites.
74 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
34.1 Match the words in the box to the pictures below.
laptop desktop computer tablet icon scanner memory stick microchip
cursor spreadsheet
1 scanner 2 3 4 5
6 7 8 9
34.2 Fill in the blanks with appropriate words from the opposite page.
scanner1 It’s so easy to use a when you want to send a handwritten document to someone
by email. It’s just like using a photocopier.
2 I’ve lost a lot of data. I wonder if my computer has a .
3 A lot of people carry their on aeroplanes and work on them during the flight.
4 I’ve got such a lot of photos, music and videos stored on my computer that my
is almost full.
5 That computer game you gave me has got amazing - the people just look
so realistic!
6 One of my most important tasks at work is to keep the up to date so that
customers’contact details are always accurate.
7 If you put the in the middle of a paragraph of text and double click, you
select the whole paragraph.
8 I downloaded a fantastic the other day - it tells me where the nearest
cash machine is to wherever I am in the world.
9 programs make it very easy to write text and to format it.
10 It’s miraculous how much data can be stored on that tiny little computer
inside your mobile phone.
34.3 Answer the questions using a verb from C opposite.
1 What do you do when you want to add new information to, for example, a database? You key it in.
2 If you don’twant to lose computer data, what must you do?
3 If you notice you’ve repeated a paragraph in an essay, what can you do?
4 You want to open your spreadsheet program, so what should you do?
5 If your computer is old and working very slowly, what might you consider doing?
6 If you accidentally delete some text you’ve just been working on, what can you do?
7 What can you do to immediately get hold of music or a film from an internet store?
8 If you buy new software when you have an old operating system, what may you find?
34.4 Over to you
Answer these questions.
1 Do you use a desktop, a laptop or a tablet? 4 How often do you back up your data?
2 How much RAM do you have? 5 Has your computer ever crashed?
3 Which apps do you use most frequently? 6 Have you ever accidentally deleted anything?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 75
