22 Food
Talking about flavours and tastes - adjectives and some opposites (≠)A
hot, spicy (e.g. curry) ≠ mild bland [very little flavour; rather negative]
salty [a lot of salt] sugary [a lot of sugar] sickly [too much sugar]
savoury /ˈseɪvəri/[pleasant, slightly salty or with herbs]
sour [sharp, often unpleasant taste, like a lemon, and not sweet]
bitter [with an unpleasantly sharp taste] tasty [has a good taste/flavour] ≠ tasteless [no flavour at all]
moreish [having a pleasant taste, so you want to eat more]
I love spicy food, especially curries - the hotter the better! My sister prefers mild curries.
Those cakes are too sugary for me. They have a sickly taste.
They had some delicious savoury snacks at the party. They were very moreish.
The breakfast buffet was very poor quality: the coffee tasted bitter and the fruit juice was sour.
The food on the plane was bland and tasteless - it was like eating cardboard!
Appearance, presentation and quality of foodB
This meat is overcooked/overdone / undercooked/underdone.
I’m afraid this mango is a bit unripe. They’re not really in season at the moment. [not ready to eat; opp
= ripe] [being produced and ready and available]
This butter has gone off. I think we should throw it out. [not good to eat because it is too old]
I don’t feel like anything heavy. I just want something light; a salad would be fine.
British cooking can be very stodgy. /ˈstɒdʒi/[heavy, hard to digest]
Zoe will only buy organic fruit and vegetables. [grown without artificial chemicals]
We should try to have a balanced diet, without too much or too little of any particular thing.
A diet of junk food can cause long-term health problems. [food that is unhealthy but easy and quick to
eat] Processed food in general is not good for you. [that has been treated with chemicals to preserve it or
give it extra colour or taste]
C Eating out
At most good restaurants, you usually have to book a table
/ make a reservation beforehand. If something happens, or
you are ill, you may need to cancel the booking/reservation. In the UK a
meal in a restaurant is typically three courses: a starter1, a main course,
then a dessert. You can often order side dishes2. Some restaurants may
have a set menu [a selection of dishes at a fixed price], or you can order
individual dishes (called ordering à-la-c arte). Restaurants often have
specials3 advertised on a board. They often cater for vegetarians, non-
meat-eaters4 and vegans5.
1 light snack / appetiser 2 a smaller dish alongside the main course (e.g. an extra vegetable)
3 dishes only available on that day 4 people who don’t eat meat but who are not vegetarians
5 people who don’t eat or use any animal products, such as meat, fish, eggs, cheese or leather
Eating at homeD 1 the person who has invited the guestsHOST:1 Right, there’s more soup. Who wants seconds2? 2 a second serving of somethingGUEST: Oh, yes, please. It was absolutely delicious. 3 serve yourselfHOST: There’s bread here. Just help yourself3. 4 desserts are often called puddingGUEST: Thanks.
(uncountable), a sweet (countable) orHOST: Be sure to keep a bit of room for some pudding4.
afters (plural) at homeCan I re-fill your glass?
GUEST: Ah, yes, thank you.
HOST: Say when.
GUEST: When! That’s fine. Thanks.
50 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
22.1 Which taste and flavour words opposite could you use to describe the following?
1 a strong Indian curry spicy / hot 4 an unripe apple
2 a pizza with cheese and herbs 5 a cup of tea with five spoonfuls of sugar
3 sea water 6 extremely strong black coffee with no sugar
22.2 Using words from B opposite, what could you say to the person/people with you in a
restaurant if ...
1 you had ordered a mild curry but got the opposite? This curry is too hot / too spicy for me.
2 the fish you ordered had obviously been cooked too much / too long?
3 you ordered melon and it was very hard?
4 your dish seemed to have no flavours at all?
5 there was too much salt in your soup?
6 someone at your table recommended a big steak but you just wanted a salad?
7 the dish you ordered was very heavy and difficult to digest?
8 a piece of chicken you ordered had not been cooked enough?
9 you wonder if the vegetables have been grown without artificial chemicals?
22.3 Read the comments and then complete the sentences with words and phrases from the
opposite page.
1 Chris: ‘I had to call the waiter to bring me a knife and fork.’ Chris needed
(some) cutlery .
2 Emma: ‘If you want a dish not on the menu there’s usually a blackboard with other dishes.’
The restaurant usually has some .
3 Oscar: ‘The peanuts were free and I just couldn’t stop eating them.’ Oscar thought the
peanuts were .
4 Tina: ‘I needed one because I didn’t want to spill food on my new dress.’ Tina needed
.
5 Jordi: ‘I’m not a vegetarian; I just don’t eat meat.’ Jordi is a .
6 Okas: ‘I didn’t like the set menu. I ordered individual dishes.’ Okas ordered .
7 Phoebe: ‘It’s a big student restaurant. You don’t need to phone beforehand.’ Phoebe said
you don’t need to / . (two answers).
8 Krishnan: ‘With my main course I ordered an extra bowl of chips and some mushrooms.’
Krishnan ordered a couple of .
9 Emily: ‘Everybody had colds so we phoned the restaurant and said we weren’t coming.’
Emily and her friends cancelled / . (two answers).
10 Hannah: ‘I had some prawns before the main course.’ Hannah had .
22.4 If you were the host at a dinner party, what could you say to your guests if ...
wants seconds1 you offered them another serving of something? Who ?
2 you wanted them to serve themselves? Please .
3 you started to re-fill their glass? . What could the guest say when you had.
poured enough? !
4 you offered them something sweet after the main course? Would you like /
/ / ? (four possible answers)
22.5 Over to you
Write sentences that are true for you.
1 Which words from A and B opposite could you use to describe the food of your country or culture? Give
some examples of dishes. Which fruit or vegetables are in season at different times of the year?
2 Describe your favourite dish, what is in it, how it is prepared, what flavours it has, etc.
3 How often do you eat junk food or processed food? Why? Do you have a balanced diet? In what ways?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 51
