Similes97
A As ... as
As ... as similes are easy to understand. If you see the phrase as dead as a doornail, you don’tneed
to know what a doornail is, simply that the whole phrase means ‘totally dead’. But remember fixed
similes are usually informal and often humorous. Those marked * are negative and could offend. Use
all these expressions with care and keep them generally as part of your receptive vocabulary.
Creating a picture in your mind can often help you remember the simile:
as blind as a bat* as thin as a rake* as strong as an ox as quiet as a mouse
Some can be remembered as pairs of opposites.
as heavy as lead /led/ ≠ as light as a feather as drunk as a lord* ≠ as sober as a judge
as black as night ≠ as white as snow (particularly used in fairy tales)
Some can be remembered by sound patterns.
as good as gold (this is used about children’s behaviour)
as cool as a cucumber as busy as a bee
Some other useful phrases using as ... as:
The bed was as hard as iron and I couldn’tsleep.
I’llgive this plant some water. The soil’s dry as a bone.
He’s as mad as a hatter*. He crossed the Atlantic in a bathtub.
She told the teacher, as bold as brass, that his lessons were boring.
You’llhave to speak slowly and clearly - he’s as deaf as a post*.
Don’tworry. Passing this exam is as easy as pie.
She knew the answer as quick as a flash.
The Princess’s skin was as white as snow. [beautifully white]
When he saw it, his face went as white as a sheet. [pale with
fear/horror]
The fish was bad and I was as sick as a dog. [vomiting] When I told him, his face
She ran off with my money - I felt as sick as a parrot. [bad feeling went as red as a beetroot.of disappointment/frustration]
Language help
You can usually make a simile using as ... as c an be, e.g. I need a drink; I’mas thirsty as can be.
B Like
My plan worked like a dream and the problem was soon solved. [worked very smoothly and well]
Be careful the boss doesn’tsee you - she has eyes like a hawk. [sees everything]
No wonder he’s fat. He eats like a horse and drinks like a fish*.
Did you sleep well? Yes, thanks, like a log.
Sorry, I forgot to ring him again. I’ve got a mind/head like a sieve! [be very forgetful]
The boss is like a bear with a sore head today. [in a very bad temper]
She goes around like a bull in a china shop*. [behaving in a very clumsy, insensitive way]
Criticising the government in his presence is like a red rag to a bull. [certain to make him
very angry]
200 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
97.1 Complete the as ... as similes.
1 Rosie is as mad as a hatter - you wouldn’tbelieve the crazy things she does.
2 You’re not eating enough - you’re as thin as a .
3 He never says a thing - he’s as quiet as a .
4 You’llhave to shout - she’s as deaf as a .
5 I’m afraid I can’tread this small print - I’m as blind as a without my glasses.
97.2 Different similes contain the same word. Fill the gap with the appropriate words.
1 I feel great now. I slept like a log.
2 No! It’s as easy as off a log.
3 After eating that bad cheese I was as sick as a .
4 I knew she had deceived me. I felt as sick as a .
5 The old man’s hair was as white as .
6 Her face suddenly went as white as a .
97.3 Match the simile beginnings on the left with the endings on the right. There are two that
are not on the opposite page. Try and guess them.
c a daisy1 quick
b ox2 red
as c flash3 flat as a(n)
d beetroot4 fresh
5 strong e pancake
97.4 Simile word puzzle. Fill in the answers, as in the example.
Across Down 1
1 bold 1 blind 2
3 mad 2 light 3 4
6 white 3 iron 5
7 fresh 4 pie
69 dry 5 cool
10 quiet 8 cold 7 8
9
10
97.5 What can you say about ...
1 a person who sees everything and never misses a thing? He/She's got eyes like a hawk.
2 a plan or course of action that works very well?
3 someone who eats and drinks a great deal?
4 someone with a very bad memory?
5 someone who has been very active and busy all day?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 201
