The natural world26
A Birds and animals horns
manebeak whiskerswing
tailfur
eggs
nest hoof
feather clawspaw
B Flowers and trees
leaves
petals pollen
branchbud boughthorn leaf bark
twig trunk
stem roots
C Specific animals
Here are the English names of some creatures that you may not know.
frog whale shark bat worm deer (singular
and plural)
owl fox snail crab pigeon peacock seal
D Some verbs and collocations for talking about processes in nature
Our apple tree flowers / blossoms in April.
Let’s pick some flowers.
These birds lay their eggs on the ground.
Bees collect pollen from flowers to make honey.
Some verbs can be intransitive (no object) or transitive (with an object):
These flowers grow very quickly. We grew some tomatoes in our garden last year.
These animals breed in the spring. My neighbour breeds Burmese cats and sells them.
Common mistakes
Remember, we pick flowers / fruit; we don’t saypick up.
We picked some flowers and put them in a vase. (NOT picked up)
We pick something up when it has fallen from its normal position or someone drops it.
A woman dropped her purse so I picked it up and gave it back to her.
58 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
26.1 Answer the questions about the animals and plants on the opposite page.
in a nest1 Where does a bird lay its eggs?
2 What do bees help to move from one flower to another as they collect nectar
to make honey?
3 What do we call the hairs that stick out from a cat’s face?
4 Which part of a flower usually has the brightest colour(s)?
5 What do we call a horse’s foot?
26.2 Put these words into two groups: ‘animal words’ or ‘plant words’.
mane petal oak willow fox worm thorn horn bark stem claw owl
animal words plant words
mane
26.3 Fill in the blanks in the sentences below using words from the opposite page.
roots1 A tree’s go a long way underground.
2 A cat can sharpen its against the of a tree.
3 Most fruit trees in spring.
4 Plants will not unless they get enough water and light.
5 Flowers last longer in a vase if you crush the end of their .
6 A flower that is just about to open is called a .
7 Take care not to prick yourself. That plant has sharp .
8 If we pick up those , we can use them to start the fire.
9 use a kind of radar to find their way around.
10 move very, very slowly.
26.4 Match the sentence beginnings on the left with the endings on the right.
d1 A large bough fell a some herbs to put on our pizza.
2 We picked up b its feathers. It was beautiful.
3 The scientists grew c into the stream and swam away.
4 The peacock opened d from the tree during the storm.
5 A frog jumped e some apples that had dropped from the tree.
6 We picked f a new type of tomato that was very big.
26.5 Answer the questions.
a deer, a snail1 Which moves fastest and which moves slowest: a worm, a snail, or a deer?
2 Which is the odd one out: a seal, a whale, or a crab?
3 Which of these animals has paws: a frog, a bat, a cat, a pigeon?
4 Which is correct? The bird lay / laid / lied three eggs.
5 Which is correct: (a), (b), or both? (a) He breeds horses. (b) Rabbits breed very quickly.
6 Which is a bird: a bat, a pigeon or both?
26.6 Over to you
A tulip is the national emblem of the Netherlands and a maple leaf represents
Canada. What flower or animal is used as the national emblem of your
country?
Find out what other plants or animals are national emblems of other countries.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 59
