Formal and informal words 195
A What is formality?
Formality is all about your relationship with the person you’re speaking or writing to. If you use
formal language, it may be because you wish to show respect, politeness, or to put yourself at
a distance (for example, ‘official’language, or academic language). Informal language can show
friendliness, equality or a feeling of closeness and solidarity with someone. You should never use
informal language just to sound fluent or clever.
B Scales of formality
Some groups of words can be put on a scale from formal to neutral to informal.
formal neutral informal
offspring children kids
abode / residence house / flat / home place
goodbye bye bye-bye / cheerio
go amiss go wrong go pear-shaped
C Words of Latin and Greek origin
Many longer words that come from Latin and Greek are quite formal. Here are some with their
neutral and/or informal equivalents, which are often shorter words.
I’llgo and email Kieran immediately. [neutral equivalent: at once; informal equivalent: right away]
The researchers utilise the most modern equipment. [neutral equivalent: use]
This problem frequently occurs with older software. [neutral equivalent: often happens]
The study established a link between stress and ill-health. [neutral equivalent: showed/proved]
This book provides us with a picture of ordinary life in the Middle Ages. [neutral equivalent: gives]
The government attempted to reduce unemployment by supporting new businesses. [neutral
equivalent: tried]
Physicists seek answers to fundamental questions about the universe. [neutral equivalents:
search for / look for; basic]
D Formal phrases
Many phrases are typical of formal contexts such as academic or official language.
What should the government do in terms of1 helping young people? Students, in particular2, need
support to complete their studies, on account of3 the high fees and living costs they have to meet.
Should students be given financial support on the basis of4 their family circumstances? And how
should the government act in relation to5 youth unemployment?
The definitions give less formal or neutral equivalents.
1 as regards, about 2 especially 3 because of 4 according to 5 as regards, about, in connection with
E Formality in notices, instructions, etc. DO NOTTHIS STAIRWAY DO NOTYou will often see rather formal words in signs, ADDRESSIS CLOSED ALIGHT WHILEnotices and directions. Make sure you know the THE DRIVER
UNTIL FURTHERmeaning of the words used so that you could THE BUS UNLESS THE
NOTICE. BUS IStell someone what the notice says using less IS IN MOTION.
STATIONARY.
formal words.
LIFT Articles TicketsWe regret
CAPACITY SIX deposited must bewe no purchasedPERSONS must be paid longer accept beforeOR MAX for in cheques. boarding
500 KILOS advance. the train.
196 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
95.1 Make the underlined words neutral, using words from B opposite.
1 She had no offspring and left all her money to her niece. children
2 The plan went pear-shaped and they abandoned the idea.
3 His abode was a small, rather old building on the edge of town.
4 Cheerio for now. I’llcall you again tomorrow at 9.30.
5 Where are the kids? Are they in the garden?
95.2 Make the underlined words more formal, using words from C opposite.
1 The link between smoking and lung cancer was shown decades ago. established
2 Anyone looking for employment in the film industry faces a tough time.
3 Social scientists often use official statistics in their research.
4 How often does the temperature fall to below zero?
5 If there is a fire, sound the fire alarm right away. Do not try to put the fire out.
6 Poverty is a basic issue in the world today.
7 This problem happens when the computer’s hard drive becomes full.
8 The doctor gave the patient a new drug that had not been fully tested.
95.3 Complete the sentences with words from the opposite page.
1 It would be wrong to make a decision on the basis of incomplete information.
2 The Internet can be a dangerous place. Children, in , need to be protected.
3 What do we need terms equipment to do this experiment?
4 Several questions arose during the discussion relation the economy.
5 He had to cancel his lecture on of illness.
95.4 Find words on the opposite page for the following.
in motion1 the opposite of stationary
2 the opposite of to board
3 a) to be sorry b) to buy c) to speak to
d) get on
4 a formal word for people
5 a formal word for stairs
95.5 If you look up an informal word in a monolingual dictionary, you will often find a neutral
equivalent as part of the definition or explanation. For example, the Cambridge Advanced
Learner’s Dictionary of English entry for kid says: ‘informal: a child or young person’.
Use a dictionary to find neutral or more formal words for these:
sleep1 kip 4 swot 7 gross
2 a pal 5 ta! 8 dodgy
3 a mate 6 brainy
95.6 Over to you
How do you mark whether a word is formal or informal in your vocabulary notebook? If possible,
compare your way with someone else’s.
See also Unit 96 for other formal and informal words and expressions.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 197
