Towns25
A Describing a city
The words city and town are sometimes used interchangeably but a city is generally large with a
wider range of facilities. This is a description of Cork, one of Ireland’s main cities. Which words or
phrases might be useful for describing your own or another town?
Cork city is the major metropolis of the south; indeed, with a population
of about 119,500, it is the second largest city in the Republic. The main
business and shopping centre of the town lies on the island created by
two channels of the River Lee, with many of the suburbs within walking
distance of the centre. The buses tend to be overcrowded and the one-way
traffic system is extremely complicated. In the hilly area of the city is the
famous Shandon Steeple, the bell-tower of St Anne’s Church, built on the
site of a church destroyed when the city was besieged by the English in 1690.
Back across the River Lee lies the city’s cathedral, an imposing 19th-century
building in the French Gothic style. Cork has two markets. Neither caters specifically for tourists but those who
enjoy the lively atmosphere of a real working market will appreciate their charm. The town has good sports
and arts facilities. The Crawford Art Gallery is well worth a visit. It regularly puts on adventurous exhibitions
by contemporary artists. The fashionable residential districts of Cork city overlook the picturesque harbour.
There are other residential areas on the outskirts.
B Facilities
Sports: swimming pool sports centre golf course tennis courts football pitch skating rink
Culture: theatre opera house concert hall radio station art gallery
Education: school college university library adult education centre museum
Catering, accommodation and night-life: restaurant take-away hotel B&B (bed and breakfast)
youth hostel club
Transport: bus service taxi rank car hire car park parking meters
Other: health centre law courts registry office citizens’ advice bureau job centre
department store chemist’s garden centre police station Town/City Hall
estate agent housing estate industrial estate
C Problems in cities
problem effect cause
traffic jams traffic very slow; commuters get very too much traffic, especially in the
stressed rush hour
slums housing in a bad condition poverty - people don’t have money to
spend on housing
vandalism pointless destruction of property poverty; lack of hope
overcrowding difficult living conditions too many people living in one place
pollution deterioration in health traffic and industrial
D Adjectives to describe a city
picturesque [very pretty and attractive], historic, spacious [with plenty of space], elegant, magnificent,
lively, deserted [no one on the streets, e.g. at night], bustling [with lots of movement], packed [very
crowded], filthy [very dirty], run-down [in a very bad condition]
Common mistakes
There are a lot of open spaces in the centre of London. (NOT There are a lot of open places in ...)
56 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
25.1 Check that you understand the text about Cork by answering the following questions.
1 Where is Cork? Cork is in the south of the Republic of Ireland.
2 Where is the shopping and business centre of Cork?
3 What is Cork’s traffic system like?
4 What is special about the site of St Anne’s Church?
5 In what style is the architecture of Cork Cathedral?
6 Can you buy souvenirs at the markets?
7 Why is the Crawford Gallery worth visiting?
8 Where do Cork people live?
25.2 Fill in the gaps in this description of a town. Use words from the text about Cork.
secondCambridge has the 1 oldest university in
England (after Oxford). It has a 2 of around
108,900, many of whom are students. The main tourist3 of the town lies in the city centre, around
the university colleges. A number of the old university
buildings are built on the 4 of former
monasteries or convents. Most of the more picturesque
colleges 5 the River Cam.
Most of the main hotels in the town are within walking 6 of the centre. The town
centre has a lively fruit and vegetable 7 and it 8 to be very crowded on
Saturdays. The Fitzwilliam Museum is well 9 visiting as is an art gallery called Kettle’s
Yard which regularly puts on quite varied 10 by a range of artists. The town also has
plenty of sports 11 catering for both young and old. An interesting new Science Park
has been built on the 12 of the town, about two kilometres from the city centre.
25.3 Look at the facilities listed in B. Think of a town and tick all those facilities which the
town has.
25.4 Suggest three words which would collocate well with the nouns below. The words do not
have to be on the left-hand page.
1 history / science / folk / museum 4 / / / court
2 / / / centre 5 / / / club
3 / / / college 6 / / / agency
25.5 Which of the facilities in B might you go to in order to:
1 dance? a club 4 get married? 7 borrow a book?
2 play tennis? 5 buy a house? 8 buy a meal to eat at home?
3 find a taxi? 6 see an exhibition? 9 do an evening class?
25.6 What are the problems in C for these suggested solutions?
1 They should provide good-quality state housing. slums
2 There should be stricter laws about traffic emissions.
3 They should restrict the number of people living in any one area.
4 People who destroy public property should be made to do community service.
5 We need a much better public transport system.
25.7 Over to you
Write a description of the town where you live or another town you know well, using as much
of the vocabulary from this unit as possible.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 57
