Exercises 1Study
unit
1.1 Here are some aspects of grammar to be aware of when learning new vocabulary.
Give two examples of words that reflect this aspect of grammar.
1 a noun only used in the plural scissors
2 an uncountable noun
3 an irregular verb
4 a noun with an irregular plural
1.2 What aspect of pronunciation should you notice about the following words?
1 subtle the b is silent
(not pronounced)
2 catastrophe
3 chemistry
4 answer
5 a record / to record
6 photograph / photographer /
photographic
1.3 Read the text. Use words from the box to complete each ‘collocations fork’.
English has a remarkable range of words. Thanks to periods of contact with foreign languages and
its readiness to coin new words out of old elements, English has a particularly large vocabulary.
For example, as well as kingly (from Anglo- Saxon) we find royal (from French) and regal (from Latin).
There are many such sets of words, which make it possible to express subtle shades of meaning.
coincidence difference family likeness palace a phrase
range shade suggestion a term welcome new words
1 a remarkable
range
likeness
coincidence
2 to coin 3 a royal 4 a subtle
1.4 Write i by the words that are informal and f by those that are formal.
1 guys i
2 a minor
3 Awesome!
4 to alight (from a bus)
5 to feel gutted
6 a felon
7 to bug someone
8 to zone out
1.5 A student learnt each of these sets of words as a group. What is the unifying factor for
each group? Can you add one more word to each group?
1 king, queen, prince, princess royalty - duke
2 sunshade, shady, shadow, shade, to shadow, shadowy
3 articulate, communicate, convey, express, put across
4 noun, verb, adjective, adverb
5 subtle, comb, lamb, crumb, debt, plumber
1.6 Draw a picture to help you remember each of the following vocabulary items.
1 circle 2 to coin new words 3 screwdriver 4 to drip
1.7 Over to you
Look at the suggestions in D. Can you think of any other ideas to add to the list? Think about the ways
of learning vocabulary that you use now, and think about ways you could use more in the future.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 9
Study
unit 2 Organising a vocabulary notebook
A Organising words by meaning
Try dividing your notebook into different broad sections, with sections for words for feelings, words
to describe places, words for movement, words for thinking, etc.
Charts and tables of various kinds can help you organise your vocabulary. Here is an example for
words connected with music:
Instruments Types of music Verbs Related words
guitar
cello
piano
classical (not classic)
folk (not folkloric)
world
play
strum (a guitar)
perform
practice (n) practise (vb)
track
release (an album)
B Building networks of meaning
A network diagram is useful. It can grow in whatever direction you want it to.
THE WEB
unfriend
someone
upload
email post
junk mail spam
sign up tweet
download(verbs)
security
identity theft
virus password
social networks
surfing
homepage forward
pop-up
link
C Collocations and fixed phrases
It is important to know how a word combines with other words (its collocations).
Always record the common collocations of a word as you meet them, e.g.
win (prize, award, medal) earn (money, a high salary) gain (time, an advantage)
Where a word is often used in a fixed phrase, always record the whole phrase, e.g.
in a hurry out of touch to and fro now and again
D Synonyms and antonyms
When you find a synonym (same meaning) or an antonym (opposite meaning) of a word you already
have in your book, enter it next to that word with a few notes, e.g.
urban ≠ rural stop = cease (cease is very formal)
E Organising by word class
Make a note of the word class of a new word (whether it is a noun, verb, adjective, etc.). Record words
from the same word family together, e.g.
produce (verb or noun) product (noun) productive (adjective)
F Stress
Record where the stress falls on a multi-syllable word, especially if the stress changes between word
classes, e.g. produce (verb) produce (noun) productive (adjective)
Language help
Note any typical errors you make or which your teacher has mentioned.
10 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
