Sound and light56
A General words to describe sound
I could hear the sound of voices/music coming from the next room. (neutral)
The noise of the traffic here is pretty bad. [loud, unpleasant sounds]
The children are making a terrible racket upstairs. Could you go and tell them to be quiet? [very loud,
unbearable noise, often of human activity; infml]
Sound and noise can both be countable or uncountable. When they are of short duration or refer
to different sounds/noises, they are countable. When they mean a lot of continual or continuous
sounds, they are uncountable.
I heard some strange sounds/noises in the night. (countable)
I wish the children wouldn’tmake so much noise when I’m working. (uncountable)
The sound of the sea is very relaxing. (uncountable)
B Sound words and things that typically make them
All the words in this section can be used as nouns or verbs.
I could hear the rain pattering on the roof. We heard the patter of a little child’s feet.
verb/noun example(s) of what makes the sound
bang a door closing in the wind, a balloon bursting
chime a big public clock on a building sounding the hour
clang a big bell ringing, a hollow metal object being struck
clatter a metal pan falling onto a concrete floor
crash a big, solid, heavy object falling onto a hard floor
hiss gas/steam escaping through a small hole
hum an electrical appliance when switched on, e.g. computer, freezer
rattle small stones in a tin being shaken
ring a small bell, a telephone
roar /rO:/ noise of heavy traffic, noise of a huge waterfall
rumble distant noise of thunder, noise of traffic far away
rustle /ˈrʌsəl/ opening a paper/plastic bag, dry leaves underfoot
screech a car’s tyres when the brakes are suddenly applied
thud a heavy object falling onto a carpeted floor
C Darkness
Here are some adjectives for dark conditions. (For adjectives describing brightness, see Unit 59.)
These brown walls are a bit gloomy. We should paint them white.
This torch is getting a bit dim. I think it needs new batteries.
It was a sombre /ˈsɒmbə/room with dark, heavy curtains. [serious, imposing]
D Types of light
Note these collocations.
A torch gives out a beam of light. A diamond ring sparkles.
A camera gives a flash of light. Stars twinkle. A candle flame
flickers in the breeze. White-hot coal on a fire glows.
The sun shines and gives out rays of light. A gold object glitters.
Language help
Many of the words relating to darkness and light can be used about people’s expressions too. Light
suggests happiness and darkness suggests unhappiness. Kate’s face was glowing with pleasure.
Dan looks very gloomy. Has he had some bad news?
118 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
56.1 Choose sound, noise(s) or racket to fill the gaps. You may use the words more than once.
sound1 I could sit and listen to the of the river all day.
2 There was a terrible outside the pub last night; it was a fight involving
about six people.
3 My car’s making some strange . I’llhave to have it checked.
4 Oh! What an awful ! I think you should take up a different instrument;
the violin’s just not for you!
5 I can’tsleep if there’s of any kind, so I use ear-plugs.
56.2 Using the table in B opposite, what sound do you think each of these might make?
1 A bottle of sparkling mineral water being opened. hiss
2 A box of saucepans being dropped down an iron staircase.
3 A mouse moving among dead grass and leaves.
4 A child falling over on a wooden floor.
5 A starting gun for a sporting event.
6 A train passing at high speed a few feet away from you.
7 A slow train passing, heard through the walls of a house.
8 A car coming to a halt very suddenly.
56.3 Choose the best word from the box to complete each sentence. Put it in the correct form.
chime clang hum patter rattle ring
rattled1 I woke up when a small earth tremor the cups on the table.
2 I can hear my mobile - I think it must be at the bottom of my bag.
3 It’s cosy indoors with the rain on the windows.
4 We live in the country but can still always hear a of traffic from the road
across the fields.
5 I couldn’tsleep last night and heard the clock on the town hall every hour.
6 Joe the metal gate behind him as he left the garden.
56.4 Pair up the sentences on the left with the ones on the right so they make sense.
1 I saw a beam of light coming towards me. b a Then it died, leaving us in complete
darkness.
2 The jewels sparkled in the sunlight. b It was a police officer holding a flashlamp.
3 The candle began to flicker uncertainly. c But blacks and greys do suit her.
4 The first rays of the sun shone into the room. d I’d never seen such a beautiful bracelet.
5 She always wears rather sombre clothes. e As we got nearer we realised it was a
bush.
6 We could see a dim shape in the fog. f It was clearly time to get up.
56.5 Which do you think is the correct meaning of the underlined words in these sentences?
a1 Her eyes were shining as she told me her news.
a looked full of happiness b looked angry c looked afraid
2 Jessica glowed all through her pregnancy.
a looked rather worried b looked pale c looked very happy
3 She beamed at him.
a smiled b shouted c attacked
4 He has a twinkle in his eyes.
a a grain of sand b a sign of humour/enjoyment c a sign of anger
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 119
