30 Health and lifestyle
DietA
Some types of food are considered to be good for our health. Others can cause long-term1 health
problems if they are consumed2 in large quantities. Here are some examples.
healthy ... not so healthy ...
sugary foods (e.g. fizzy3 drinks)oily fish (e.g. salmon)
fruit and nuts4 food with a high fat or high salt content5
wholemeal6 bread processed7 food
1 lasting a long time into the future 2 eaten (fml) 3 with a lot of bubbles 4 dry fruits of some trees with a
5 amount that is in the food 6 containing all the grain, with nothing taken out 7 treated withhard shell
chemicals to preserve the food or to add taste or colour
Some foods are considered to be superfoods - foods that may prevent diseases and improve
mental1 as well as physical2 health. Foods that are often listed as superfoods include:
• Blueberries: may improve short-term3 memory and slow4
the ageing process5.
• Apples: a good source6 of vitamin C; they can also lower7 cholesterol.
• Spinach: high in vitamin A; it can boost8 the immune system.
• Vegetable juice (especially tomato): can reduce the risk9 of heart disease.
1 of the mind 2 of the body 3 lasting a short time 4 make it happen more slowly
5 the changes to our body and mind by which we grow old 6 the place it comes from
7 reduce/take the level down 8 improve or increase 9 make less likely that it will happen
LifestyleB
Read the magazine extracts about lifestyle issues. Note the use of the adjective and noun forms of
the same word.
There has been a sharp rise1 in the number Keeping fit need not be difficult. You can
of children who are obese2. Childhood maintain5 a good level of fitness with
obesity is now a major3 problem. Children a simple routine of daily exercise. Start
often take too little exercise. exercising now!
People often do not realise how stressful Bad habits can cause serious harm6
their jobs are. Stress can cause high blood to the body. Alcohol and tobacco are
pressure, increased risk of heart attacks and particularly harmful if consumed in large
depression4. quantities over a long period.
1 an increase that is sudden and quick 2 extremely fat 3 very big and serious 4 a mental illness when
5 keep (fml) 6 injury or damagesomeone is extremely unhappy and anxious for a long period
Language help
The nouns food and fruit can be both uncountable and countable. When we refer to food and fruit
in general we use the uncountable form (e.g. That restaurant serves good food / I love fruit). The
plural forms, foods/fruits, are used to refer to individual types or examples of food (e.g. fatty foods,
citrus fruits). We always use fish in the singular.
66 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
30.1 Rewrite the words in bold using words from A opposite.
1 If people eat these foods in big amounts large quantities , it may be dangerous.
2 Certain foods are thought by scientists to have a positive effect on
our bodies.
3 Foods with a lot of fat in them may cause health problems.
4 Some foods may cause health problems that last long into the future.
30.2 Match the adjectives and nouns to make five collocations to fill the gaps in the sentences
below.
adjectives nouns
oily processed wholemeal mental fizzy drinks bread fish health foods
1 Wholemeal bread is usually considered to be healthy because it contains the complete grain, with
nothing taken out.
2 may taste good when you’re very thirsty, but they often have a high
sugar content.
3 Types of include salmon.
4 often contain artificial colours to make them look more attractive.
5 Some foods can be good for our as well as our bodies.
30.3 Verb-noun collocations. Match the sentence beginnings on the left with the endings on
the right.
1 Certain foods can slow a cholesterol.d
2 Some foods can boost b the risk of heart disease.
3 Some foods can lower c the immune system.
4 Other foods can reduce d the ageing process.
30.4 Can you remember which positive effect each of these foods may have? Choose your
answers from 30.3 (a-d).
1 spinach c 2 vegetable juice 3 apples 4 blueberries
30.5 Correct the mistakes in these sentences. There may be more than one.
1 Blueberries can improve short-time memory. term
2 Many fruits are a good sauce of vitamin C and provide mayor health benefits.
3 Oily fishes should form part of a healthy diet.
4 Which do you prefer to eat as a snack if you’re hungry, fruits or nuts?
5 A: There’s a new Chinese restaurant in town. B: Good! I love Chinese foods.
6 There has been a sharp raise in the number of people suffering from depresion.
30.6 Complete the two versions of each sentence. Use related word forms, as in the example.
harm harmful1 Tobacco and alcohol can cause a lot of / can be to our health.
2 Children who are / who suffer from need to exercise more.
3 Her job is very / causes her a lot of and is very tiring.
4 How can we keep / maintain a good level of ? The answer is to
get regular / to regularly.
30.7 Over to you
List the foods that you eat most regularly. How many are (a) healthy (b) not so healthy? Do you
consume any superfoods? Why? Why not?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 67
