US English101
A English in the USA
English in the USA differs from British English. Pronunciation is the most striking difference but there
are also differences in vocabulary and spelling as well as some differences in grammar. Americans
say the fall, while British English speakers say autumn; American speakers say on the weekend; British
English prefers at the weekend. Yet, generally, British and American speakers have little difficulty in
understanding each other.
B American English spelling
American English spelling is usually simpler. For example, British English words ending in -our and
-re end in -or and -er in American English, e.g. colour/color, centre/center. Many verbs ending in
-ise in British English end in -ize in US English (realise/realize). There are differences in individual
words too, e.g. British jewellery is jewelry in American English.
C US words and their British equivalents
Travel and on the street In the home
American English British English American English British English
gas(oline) petrol garbage, trash rubbish
truck lorry elevator lift
baggage luggage* eraser rubber
sidewalk pavement apartment flat
crosswalk zebra crossing closet wardrobe
line queue yard garden
vacation holiday drapes curtains
parking lot car park flashlight torch
trunk (of car) boot French fries chips
hood (of car) bonnet Scotch tape Sellotape
freeway/interstate motorway cookie biscuit
one-way trip single candy sweets
round trip return bathroom, rest room** toilet, WC
railway car railway carriage diaper nappy
subway underground pantyhose tights
* baggage is also common in British English, especially in the context of air travel
** wash room is commonly used in Canada
Language help
American and British pronunciations are often different. You can hear the British and American
pronunciation of words on the Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary at Cambridge Dictionaries Online.
D Different meanings
Here are some words and phrases which could cause confusion when used by Brits and Americans
talking together because they mean something different in each ‘language’.
undershirt (AmE) the second floor (BrE)
the second floor (AmE)vest (BrE) underpants (AmE/BrE) the first floor (BrE)
pants (BrE) the ground floor (BrE)
the ground floor/the firstcheck (AmE) vest (AmE) oor (AmE)bill (BrE) waistcoat (BrE)
pants (AmE)
trousers (BrE)
wash the dishes (AmE/BrE) wash up (AmE)bill (AmE) wash up (BrE) wash your hands (BrE)note (BrE)
208 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
101.1 If you saw words spelt in the following way, would you expect the writer in each case to
be British or American? Why?
American (ends in -or)1 favor 3 hospitalized 5 colour
2 centre 4 a movie theater 6 jewelry
101.2 What are (a) the American and (b) the British words for the following things?
1 closet, wardrobe 2 3 4
5 6 7 8
101.3 Translate the following into British English.
1 We went there in the fall. We went there in the autumn. 6 Our bags are in the trunk.
2 Pass me the cookies. 7 One-way or round trip?
3 It’s in the closet. 8 Let’s take the subway.
4 Open the drapes. 9 We’ve been working in the yard.
5 We’ve run out of gas. 10 I hate waiting in line.
101.4 Can you avoid some of the most common confusions arising between British and
American speakers? Try the following quiz.
1 Where would you take (a) an American visitor or (b) a British visitor who said they wanted to wash up -
the kitchen or the bathroom? (a) bathroom (b) kitchen
2 You have just come into an unknown office block. If (a) an American or (b) a Brit says that the office
you need is on the second floor, how many flights of stairs do you need to climb?
(a) (b)
3 If (a) an American or (b) a Brit asks for a bill, is he or she more likely to be in a bank or a café?
(a) (b)
4 Would a man wear a vest under or over his shirt (a) if he is British or (b) if he is from the USA?
(a) (b)
101.5 Complete the sentences in two ways, an American way and a British way.
parking lot / car park1 We can park the car in the behind the station.
2 I’ve written the wrong number here. Can I borrow your ?
I’llcorrect it.
3 All that food is no good any more - we’d better throw it in the
4 We can take the up to the fifth floor.
5 Don’tcross here - it’s dangerous. There’s a further down the street.
6 The car wouldn’tstart so we opened the to see if we could find what
was wrong.
101.6 Over to you
If you were going on holiday/vacation to the US, which of the words listed opposite do you think it
would be most important for you to know?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 209
