75 Compound nouns 1: noun + noun
A What are compound nouns?
A compound noun is a fixed expression which is made up of more than one word and functions as
a noun. Such expressions are frequently combinations of two nouns, e.g. car park, human being
[person], science fiction [fiction based on some kind of scientific fantasy]. A number of compound nouns
are related to phrasal verbs and these are dealt with in Unit 76.
How are compound nouns written?B
If you understand both parts of the compound noun, the meaning will usually be clear. Compound
nouns are usually written as two words, e.g. tin opener [an opener for tins], bank account [an account
in a bank], pedestrian crossing [a place for people to cross a road], but sometimes they are written with
a hyphen instead of a space between the words, e.g. self-control [control over your own emotions and
reactions]. Sometimes they may be written as one word, e.g. earring, trademark [the symbol of a
product], babysitter [someone who stays with a baby/child while parents are out].
Note that there are no strict rules about which compound words should be written in which way.
There is a lot of variation even between dictionaries.
C Stress in compound nouns
Usually the main stress is on the first part of the compound but sometimes it is on the second part.
In the common compound nouns below, the word which contains the main stress is underlined.
alarm clock contact lens mineral water voice mail
blood donor credit card package holiday windscreen
burglar alarm heart attack steering wheel windscreen wiper
bus stop light bulb tea bag youth hostel
D Grammar of compound nouns
Compound nouns may be countable, uncountable or only used in either the singular or the plural.
The examples given in C are all countable compound nouns. Here are some examples of common
uncountable compound nouns.
air traffic control computer technology food poisoning junk food
birth control cotton wool hay fever [allergy to pollen] mail order
blood pressure data processing income tax pocket money
Here are some examples of common compound nouns used only in the singular.
arms race [two or more countries competing generation gap
to have the most powerful military] labour force
climate change sound barrier
death penalty welfare state
Here are some examples of common compound nouns used only in the plural.
grass roots kitchen scissors race relations sunglasses
headphones luxury goods roadworks traffic lights
156 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
75.1 Complete these bubble networks with any appropriate expressions from the opposite page.
Add extra bubbles if you need them.
bank account
health
money
credit card
social
issues
75.2 Here are some compound expressions you have looked at in this unit. Explain what the
significance of the nouns used in the compound is.
1 windscreen A screen that protects a driver from the wind.
2 burglar alarm 5 climate change 8 pocket money
3 food poisoning 6 kitchen scissors 9 welfare state
4 generation gap 7 luxury goods 10 voice mail
75.3 What are they talking about? In each case the answer is a compound noun opposite.
1 I had it taken at the doctor’s this morning and he said it was a little high for my age.
blood pressure
2 It’s happening through man-made pollution and is causing more extreme weather.
3 She always has terrible sneezing fits in the early summer.
4 I can’tunderstand why they spend so much on devising ways of killing people.
5 They say that working there is much more stressful than being a pilot.
6 The worst time was when one fell out at the theatre and I spent the interval searching around on the
floor. I can’tsee a thing without them.
7 I don’tthink it should ever be used whatever the crime.
8 It’s much easier not to have to make your own travel arrangements.
9 It’s not difficult to access mine on my mobile.
10 You really shouldn’tcross the road at any other place.
11 I didn’tlike the low-energy ones at first because they’re so slow to get going.
12 I had it very badly once when I ate some chicken that wasn’tproperly cooked.
75.4 In some cases more than one compound noun can be formed from one particular element.
For example, blood pressure and blood donor; air traffic control, birth control and self-
control. Complete the following compound nouns using nouns from the box.
bite country fast inheritance level
mail pot rat ties word
1 junk mail 4 tea 7 -processing 10 race
2 sound 5 mother 8 crossing
3 blood 6 tax 9 food
75.5 Now make up some sentences like those in exercise 75.3 relating to the new compound
nouns you made in exercise 75.4.
EXAMPLE 1 I get a ridiculous amount of this through my letter box every day. (junk mail)
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 157
