Exercises 2Study
unit
2.1 Organise the words into the topics below. Use a dictionary if necessary.
tabloid stress hang out with sb exhaustion podcast overwork
upload a video burnt out blogosphere journalist snowed under with work
casual acquaintance blog be close to sb count on sb be under pressure
topic words
working too much / too hard stress
friendship
media
2.2 Here is a list of words a learner of English made in a vocabulary notebook in class.
Organise them in a more efficient way, using the chart.
rush oversleep latecomer alarm clock set a clock deep sleep fast asleep
out of breath heavy sleeper in a hurry breathless nightmare dash yawn
exhausted
nouns verbs adjectives collocations fixed phrases
latecomer
2.3 Change the sentences using a synonym (S) or antonym (A) of the words in bold using
words from the box.
glad spicy deprive sb of sth shot dissatisfied chilly
1 I was pleased glad to hear you’d passed your exam. (S)
2 I got some excellent photos of the Grand Canyon on my trip to the US. (S)
3 She was happy with the conditions they offered her in the new job. (A)
4 The prisoners were supplied with food and medical care. (A)
5 I don’tlike mild curries. (A)
6 It’s a cold day today. (S)
2.4 Fill in the missing word forms. Then mark the word stress for each item.
noun verb adjective person
perfection perfect perfect perfectionist
information inform
politics
economics *
* Give two adjectives.
2.5 Over to you
Think about your own learning style and which ways of organising vocabulary would work best
for you.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 11
Study
unit 3 Using your dictionary
A What a good dictionary tells you: the basics
A good learners’dictionary (in book form or online) can tell you about:
• Pronunciation: this may mean learning some symbols which are different from the letters of
the English alphabet.
T th in thick ð th in then ʧ ch in church
S sh in she ʤ j in jam ʒ s in pleasure
ŋ ng in ring æ a in bad ɒ o in top
O: or in form ʊ u in put @ a in about
ʌ u in up ɜː ir in bird
• Word stress: often shown by a mark before the syllable to be stressed or by underlining or
bold type, e.g. /əd'venʧə/, /westən/, complicated.
• Usage: how a word is used and any special grammatical pattern that goes with it, e.g.
suggest + clause (not an infinitive) – I suggest you ring her right away.
(NOT I suggest you to ring her right away.)
B Additional information
• Synonyms (words of similar meaning) and antonyms (opposites), e.g. mislay and misplace
(synonyms), friend ≠ enemy/foe (antonyms).
• Collocations (how words go together), e.g. the adjective firm is often used in these
collocations: firm commitment, firm grip, firm believer.
• Whether a verb is transitive or intransitive: catch is transitive and must have an object,
e.g. He caught the ball and threw it back to me; laugh is intransitive and does not need an
object, e.g. She laughed when I told her the news.
• Whether a word is used for people and/or things. In this entry for the adjective hurtful in
the Cambridge Advanced Learner’s Dictionary online,
we can see that hurtful can be used about what
someone says or about someone:
• Word class (often as abbreviations n noun, adj
adjective, etc.), and whether a noun is countable or
uncountable.
• Information about how words are related to one another through meaning. The Cambridge
Advanced Learner’s Dictionary online allows you to see a visual display of the networks of
meaning for a word, as in this display for the adjective fascinating. The Visual Thesaurus
shows related adjectives.
hurtful /ˈhɜːtfəl/adjective
causing emotional pain:
That was a very hurtful remark!
How can you be so hurtful?
The adjectives are grouped
according to meaning. This
can be very useful when you
are writing. If you want to
vary your use of adjectives,
you can look up the related
adjectives to see which one(s)
most closely express(es) the
meaning you need.
enchanting
enthralling captivating
entrancing bewitching
fascinating
absorbing
riveting
engrossing gripping
12 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
