Money40
A Personal finance
Read these advertisements about personal finance.
. Newbank - Your Bank Short of cash? Need a loan?
Need a good current account1 with the best Need to raise money for that round-the-world
interest rates2 and a guaranteed overdraft trip? For a loan with competitive8 interest rates£facility3? Pop into one of our branches. visit our website at www.cashforyou.com
TOO MANY CREDIT CARDS? . Looking for a mortgage9? Act now! For mortgagesConsolidate4 all your cards and debts5 into with low deposits10 and flexible repayments11
one convenient payment6. Discuss your call 01569 87623.credit limit7 with us today. Call 01677 442319.
1 account you use for most everyday business 2 percentage which the bank pays you based on how much you
have in your account 3 permission to have a negative amount of money in your account 4 join together
to make one 5 money you owe someone 6 the act of paying something 7 the maximum amount of
money you may spend on your card 8 as good as or better than other banks 9 a loan used usually to buy a
house 10 money you pay before buying something to show you really want to buy it 11 payments to reduce
the amount you owe
B Bank accounts and services
I’ve just opened a savings account7, and II have a steady income1 now, which is great, transfer8 money into it regularly.and my outgoings2 are quite low. I don’thave
any major expenses3.
I pay all my bills by direct debit4, so I don’t My account is usually in credit9 at the beginning of
have to worry about them. It also means the month, but by the end of the month it’s always
I have a good credit rating5, so I can overdrawn10. I hate being in the red11 and the
borrow money if I need to. banks all charge interest12 on overdrafts! I try not to
go over my overdraft limit, though.
I need to buy a car, but I’m not sure how I’m
going to finance6 it.
I use online banking most of the time. I
only go to the bank occasionally, to use
the cash machine.
1 money coming in regularly, in a way that does not change much 2 money you pay each month, e.g. rent,
cost of running a car, etc. 3 money you spend on things 4 money taken automatically from your account,
e.g. to pay bills, a mortgage, etc.; the bank debits (verb) your account for the necessary sums of money
5 judgement made by a bank about how likely someone is to pay back money that they borrow 6 find the
money needed to pay for it 7 account where you put money you do not immediately need 8 move from
one account to another 9 has a positive amount of money in it 10 has a negative amount of money in it
11 infml have a negative amount of money in your account 12 make you pay a percentage of the amount
C Public finance
The government collects money through taxes. Income tax is the tax collected on wages and
salaries. Inheritance tax is collected on money people get from people who have died. Customs (or
excise) duty is paid on goods imported from other countries; airports usually have duty-free shops.
VAT (value added tax) is a tax paid on most goods and services. Companies pay corporation tax on
their profits.
86 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
40.1 Match the words on the left with the definitions on the right.
e1 interest a an account for money you don’tneed immediately
2 mortgage b payment taken automatically from an account
3 overdraft c an account for day-to-day use
4 savings account d a loan to buy a house or flat
5 current account e money that is charged on a loan
6 direct debit f an account with a negative sum of money in it
40.2 Use words from A opposite to complete the sentences.
1 Nico owes his brother 5,000 euros and he borrowed 10,000 euros to buy a car. Nico has
ebtsd totalling 15,000 euros.
2 Misha spent 6,000 euros on her credit card; the bank said she’d spent 1,000 euros too much.
Her c l was 5,000 euros.
3 Newbank offers interest rates on loans that are similar to the rates other banks offer and are
sometimes better. Newbank’s rates are c
4 Before she bought her new car, Alice paid £500 to the dealer. She paid a d
of £500.
5 If a customer needs more money than is in their account, they can get permission to go on using
the account. The bank offers an o f
6 Harry sold his car, got a part-time job and offered to clean people’s windows. He was trying to
r money to f his trip to Africa.
7 You only need one credit card. You can c all the sums you owe into one
p
8 If you want to buy a house, the bank offers loans where you can pay the money back over
30 years. The bank offers m with r over 30 years.
40.3 What do we call ...
1 the tax you pay on imported goods? customs / excise duty
2 a shop at an airport where you don’tpay tax?
3 a tax which is added to most goods and services?
4 a tax on money paid if someone dies?
5 the tax that companies pay on their profits?
6 the tax that the government takes out of your salary?
40.4 Answer the questions. Give reasons for your answers.
1 If you were overdrawn, would you be in a good situation or a bad one?
A bad situation - you would have a negative amount of money in your bank account.
2 Why might a person open a savings account as well as a current account?
3 Joel’s account is in the red. Why is his bank manager unhappy?
4 Why might someone transfer money from a savings account to a current
account?
5 Why is online banking easier than visiting your branch?
6 Why are cash machines so convenient? Are there any risks in using them?
7 Zara’s account is in credit. Is she probably happy or unhappy?
8 Bob doesn’thave a steady income and his outgoings are very high. Do you think he feels secure
or insecure?
9 If your bank debited your account for 500 euros, would you feel you had more or less money as
a result?
10 If you have a good credit rating, what will you find it easier to do?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 87
