Describing objects41
Some pairs of opposite adjectivesA
Cotton is a natural material and nylon is artificial.
Red and yellow are vivid colours while grey is a sombre colour.
a conventional a bizarre chairYou can see through a transparent material but you can’tsee
chairthrough an opaque material.
A machine that has no problems at all is perfect while one that doesn’twork properly is faulty.
Something that is hard and doesn’tmove or bend easily is stiff while something that bends easily is
flexible.
A material that can be easily spoilt by, for example, washing,
can be called delicate while something that is hard to spoil
can be called tough.
A material like glass that can be easily broken can be called
fragile while something that does not break easily can be a plain frame a decorative framecalled strong or sturdy.
I prefer strong coffee to weak coffee - I can’tstand coffee that has too much water or milk in it. I like
to be able to really taste my coffee!
The painting is not a genuine Picasso - it’s a fake.
B Adjectives and nouns
adjective noun example meaning
decent decency I’d like to get a table that’s a decent size so we good
can have ten people to a meal.
entire entirety Between them they ate the entire cake! whole
characteristic character, Big windows are characteristic of houses built in typical
characteristic the early 1900s.
precise precision We need to take precise measurements before exact
we decide which fridge to get.
severe severity It’s a severe building - all concrete and straight very serious
lines.
solid solidity The table is made of solid oak. hard all through
trivial trivia, triviality He doesn’t write serious novels, just trivial insignificant
romances.
The only verbs that can be formed from adjectives in the above table are characterise, solidify and
trivialise.
C Phrases typical of speech
Did you see that great big cat run across the grass? [very big]
This photo isn’thalf as interesting as that one. [is much less]
Jessie’s car is nowhere near as powerful as mine. [much less]
Tamara makes an unusually strong cup of coffee.
It’s a reasonably good piece of sculpture. [fairly good]
It’s a pretty thick book. [fairly thick]
88 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
41.1 Answer these questions relating to the adjectives in A opposite.
lycra1 Which is artificial - silk or lycra?
2 Which is more delicate when it comes to washing - silk or cotton?
3 Would you say a watch that looks like a snake has a conventional or a bizarre design?
4 How could you describe car brakes that are not working properly?
5 Which would cost more - a genuine Monet painting or a fake one?
6 Which of these materials is more fragile - china or wood?
7 Which is more flexible - metal or rubber?
41.2 Choose the correct option to complete each sentence.
B1 Jana’s clothes are never frivolous - they’re always rather .
A delicate B severe C precise D bizarre
2 This painting is of the works of Rembrandt.
A characteristic B solid C entire D plain
3 I’d like to buy the salami, please, not just a small piece of it.
A precise B trivial C entire D solid
4 Do have the to put on a new shirt, not that one with the hole.
A decency B severity C vividness D characteristic
5 Writing a good job application is not a matter.
A solid B conventional C trivial D transparent
6 Making beautiful jewellery requires a high degree of .
A entirety B precision C character D triviality
41.3 Choose words from the box to complete the dialogue.
reasonably nowhere half great unusually pretty
NINA: I love this room, Mark. Those 1 great big windows are wonderful, and the views
from them are 2 amazing too.
MARK: Thanks. And I’m sure it isn’t3 as expensive as you might imagine.
I only pay 1,000 euros a month.
NINA: Wow! That’s 4 near as much as I pay. And my flat’s very noisy too. It seems5 quiet here - you don’tseem to hear too much noise from the street.
MARK: No, it’s not too bad. And I’ve certainly got 6 quiet neighbours. I never hear
a sound from their flat.
NINA: Lucky you! I wish I could say the same about mine.
41.4 Some words in this unit can be used to talk about abstract ideas as well as objects.
Use your knowledge of these words to answer the questions.
1 If someone gives you a genuine smile, do they feel friendly or not particularly friendly
They feel friendlytowards you?
2 Do you think a transparent argument is one that is easy or difficult to follow?
3 If a writer describes something vividly, is their writing effective?
4 If a person behaves in a stiff way, are they more likely to be relaxed or tense?
5 If the teacher says your work is ‘solid’, are you likely to be pleased or not?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 89
