Discourse markers in spoken English67
A What are discourse markers?
Discourse markers are expressions which organise, comment on or in some way frame what we are
saying. An example is well.
A: So you live in Boston? B: Well, near Boston.
Well here shows that the speaker is aware he/she is changing the direction of the conversation in
some way (not giving the expected ‘yes’answer). Another example is how teachers use words like
Right and OK to organise what is happening in a classroom:
Right/OK, let’s have a look at exercise 3.
B Organising a conversation
Here are some common expressions which organise the different stages of a conversation.
Now, what shall we do next? So, would you like to come to the table now, please?
Good, I’llring you on Thursday, then. Well then, what was it you want to talk about?
Now then, I want you to look at this picture. (said by someone in control of the conversation, e.g. a teacher)
Fine/Great, let’s meet again next week, then, shall we? (often used to close conversations)
So, where was I? I was telling you about my aunt ... (often used after an interruption or to come back to
the main topic or story)
C Modifying and commenting on what you say
In these mini-dialogues, the expressions in bold modify or comment on what is being said.
A: It’s cold, isn’t it? A: What’s her number?
B: Yeah. B: Let me see, I have it here
A: Mind you, it’s November, so it’s not surprising. somewhere ... (a hesitation -
(an afterthought, used like however) gaining time)
A: It’s quite a problem ... A: And he said he was go-
B: Listen/Look, why don’t you let me sort it B: Well, that’s typical!
out? (introducing a suggestion / an important A: Hang on / Hold on! Let
point) me tell you what he said!
A: Would you? Thanks a lot. (preventing an interruption)
D Other useful discourse markers
I can’tdo that. You see, I’m not the boss here. (explaining)
He was, you know, sort of ... just standing there. (hesitation)
He was wearing this, kind of / like, cowboy hat. (not sure of the best way to say something)
So that’s what we have to do. Anyway, I’llring you tomorrow. (the speaker thinks the topic can change or
the conversation can now close)
It rained all day yesterday. Still / On the other hand, we can’tcomplain, it was fine all last week.
(contrasts two ideas or points)
We shouldn’tbe too hard on him. I mean, he’s only a child. (making clear what you mean)
In informal spoken language, people often use the letters of the alphabet (usually no more than a, b and
c), to list points they want to make.
STELLA: Why aren’tyou going this evening?
ADAM: Well, a) I haven’tgot any money, and b) it’s too far anyway.
It is often difficult to hear these expressions when they are used in rapid speech, but when you are in
a position to listen in a relaxed way to someone speaking English (for example, if you are not the person
being spoken to, or you are listening to informal speech on radio or TV or in a film), it is easier to concentrate
on listening for discourse markers.
140 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
67.1 Underline all the discourse markers in this monologue.
‘Well, where shall I start? It was last summer and we were just sitting in
the garden, sort of doing nothing much. Anyway, I looked up and ... you
see, we have this, kind of, long wall at the end of the garden, and it’s ...
like ... a motorway for cats. That big fat black one you saw , well, that one
considers it has a right of way over our vegetable patch, so ... where was
I? I was looking at that wall, you know, daydreaming as usual, and all of a
sudden there was this new cat I’d never seen before. It wasn’t an ordinary
cat at all ... I mean, you’ll never believe what it was ...’
67.2 Here are some short dialogues where there are no discourse markers, which would be
unusual in real informal conversation. Use markers from the box to fill the gaps. You can
use the markers more than once, and more than one answer may be possible.
good I mean hang on well let me see right still listen anyway you know
1 A: Are you a football fan? 5 A: He’s looking exhausted.
B: Well , I like it but I wouldn’t say I was B: Really?
A: , look at his eyes - he looksa fan.
so tired.
2 A: I’ll take care of these.
6 A: What do you mean, ‘cold’?B: .That’s everything.
B: , she’s not friendly, very distant.A: , see you next week.
Last week I gave her a nice smile andB: . That was a very useful meeting.
she scowled at me.
A: , what do you expect? I’ve seen
3 A: It was last Monday. I was coming home the way you smile at people; it puts them
from work. I saw this funny old man off.
approaching me. I stopped him ...
B: I bet it was Jim Dibble! 7 A: Money isn’t the most important thing in life.
A: ! Let me tell you what B: , you can’t live without it!
happened first. A: I suppose that’s true.
8 A: What are we going to do?4 A: Which number is yours? B: , I’ve got an idea. Why don’t weB: ... it’s that one there, yes, that one. ask James to help? He’s a lawyer.
67.3 Which discourse marker fits best into the sentences? Rewrite the sentences with the markers
included.
on the other hand great a, b, c, etc. anyway look now
Anyway,
1 Yes, there is a lot of work to do. I must rush now, I’llcall you tomorrow.
2 There are two reasons why I think he’s wrong. People don’tact like that, and Paul would certainly
never act like that.
3 I want you to pay attention, everyone.
4 He loses his temper very quickly. He’s got a great sense of humour.
5 You seem a bit sad today. Let me buy lunch for you to cheer you up.
6 A: So I’llpick you up at 6.30. B: See you then.
67.4 Over to you
Choose three expressions that appeal to you from this unit and try to use them in your spoken English.
Be careful not to overuse them!
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 141
