Expressions with get91
A Meanings of get
Get is used frequently in spoken English. It has the following basic meanings:
• receive, obtain or buy something, e.g. Please get me a sandwich when you’re in town. I got
a text from John today. She got top marks in her exam.
• change position - move or be moved, e.g. How are you getting home tonight?
• change state - become or make, e.g. She’s ill but she’s getting better.
B Specific meanings of get
Get also has many other more specific meanings.
It’s my turn to get dinner tonight. [prepare a meal]
I don’tget it. Why did he speak like that? [understand]
His behaviour really gets me at times. [annoy]
I saw Harry’s new girlfriend at the party but I didn’tget to speak to her. [manage]
Once we got to know each other, we became great friends. [became acquainted]
The phone’s ringing and there’s someone at the door! You get the phone and I’llget the
door. [answer, respond to]
C Phrasal verbs based on get
phrasal verb meaning example
get across successfully communicate an idea It was difficult to get my point of view
across to the committee.
get at reach, find I hope the inquiry will get at the truth.
get behind with fail to do something by a certain I’ve got terribly behind with my work.
time
get down depress This weather is getting me down.
get down to begin to give some serious attention It’s time you got down to some work.
to
get into be successful with an application She did well in her exams and got into
(e.g. to a college/school) university.
get on manage However will we get on without you?
get on advance, develop Jo is getting on very well at school.
get out of avoid a responsibility I’ll try to get out of my next lesson.
get over recover from She’s getting over a bad attack of flu.
get round spread The news soon got round the village.
get round to do something you’ve intended to do I need to buy a new desk but I can’t get
for a long time round to it. I’m so busy.
get through come to a successful end I’m glad she got through all her exams!
get through use up all of He got through his month’s salary in just
one weekend.
get up to to do (especially something bad) The children are very quiet. I wonder what
they’re getting up to?
D Other expressions based on get
You seem to have got out of bed on the wrong side today. [be in a bad mood]
The meeting got off to a good/bad start with Elliot’s speech. [started well/badly]
I’m organising a little get-together. I hope you can come. [informal meeting/party]
When they broke up he got rid of everything of hers. [threw away / destroyed]
I’m going to get my own back on her somehow. [take my revenge]
188 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
91.1 Replace the underlined get expressions with another way of expressing the same
idea. Note that by doing this you are changing the text from being very informal
to being slightly more formal.
receiveI don’t often get interesting junk mail. However, an unusual item came
this morning. It was headed ‘Are things getting you down? Do you feel
you’ll just neverget to do all those things you dream of?’ And it went
on, ‘If so,get this great new book today: Manage Your World by Simon
Triksta. It will teach you how to get over those daily upsets, and will
ensure that you get the contentment in your work that you long for and
that you fulfil your dreams. Send €25 today to get Manage Your World
and your key to success within ten days.’
Maybe I should get it!
91.2 Fill the gaps in the sentences below in the most appropriate way.
1 Although they had only told their parents about their engagement, the news soon got
round the village.
2 She must have made a good impression last week because she has got to the second
round of interviews for the job.
3 I have an essay to write but I’m finding it hard to get it.
4 I’ve been meaning to redecorate my room for ages but I just can’tget it.
5 What have you been getting since we last met?
6 Surely you haven’tgot all the biscuits already?
7 The new political party was finding it difficult to get its message to the public.
8 I was ill last semester and I got seriously with my studies. If this continues,
I probably won’tget university this year.
9 We’re having a get- on Friday to celebrate Jan’s birthday. Would you like to come?
10 His progress on the guitar was slow at first, but he’s getting well now.
91.3 Match the situations on the left with the appropriate responses on the right.
1 Someone has been very impolite to e a You always try to get out of things!
one of your friends.
2 Someone is about to throw something b You wait! I’llget my own back on you
away. one day!
3 Someone is being negative about c Don’tget rid of that yet!
everything you suggest.
4 Someone has done something very d You got out of bed on the wrong side
cruel to you. this morning!
5 Someone says they can’thelp with the e Your rudeness really gets me!
clearing up after a party.
91.4 Over to you
Complete the following sentences in a way that is true for you.
1 I would hate to get rid of ... 4 I wish I could get out of ...
2 My ... g ot off to a bad start because ... 5 ... is r eally getting me down.
3 I find it very hard to get down to ...
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 189
