Praising and criticising48
A Praising
You praise someone for something. The teacher praised the children for their hard work.
Highly praised is a common collocation. William’s acting in this film has been highly praised.
She plays the guitar brilliantly, just like her father. [very skilfully] He’s the very best, a really
first-rate / top-notch administrator. When it comes to grammar, she’s really on the ball. [quick to
understand] Ben has a way with foreign students. The other teachers envy him. [good at establishing
good relations / motivating them, etc.] Emma really has green fingers; look at those flowers! [good at
gardening] Let him do the talking; he’s got the gift of the gab. [good at talking]
Imogen is head and shoulders above the rest of the girls at maths. (usually used of people) / She’s
miles better than the other girls at maths. When it comes to technology, Japan is streets ahead
of most other countries. As far as sport is concerned, Sam is among the best in his class. [one
of the best; can also say among the worst / most interesting, etc.] That meal was just out of this
world. [outstanding/superb; usually used of things]
B Criticising
The verb criticise can mean: to say that someone or something is bad, e.g. Paige’s parents are always
criticising her appearance. Notice that it can also be used to mean: give an opinion or judgement
about a book or film, e.g. I belong to a writer’s group - we read and criticise each other’s work.
critical /ˈkrɪt.ɪ.kəl/
adjective NOT PLEASED
1 saying that someone or something is bad or wrong:
a critical report  The report is highly critical of safety standards at the factory.
adjective IMPORTANT
2 of the greatest importance to the way things might happen:
The President’s support is critical (to this project).  a critical decision
adjective GIVING OPINIONS
3 giving opinions or judgements on books, plays, films, etc.:
She has written a major critical appraisal/study of Saul Bellow’s novels.  His last film won/
received critical acclaim (= was praised by film critics).
adjective SERIOUS
4 extremely serious or dangerous:
Both drivers are critical / in a critical condition (= so badly hurt that they might die) after the
120 mph crash.
The adverb critically can relate to any of these four meanings of ‘critical’although the following are
the most frequent uses:
critically important (meaning 2), critically acclaimed (meaning 3), critically ill (meaning 4)
Note these idiomatic synonyms of the verb to criticise (with its meaning of saying something is bad):
You shouldn’trun down your own country when you’re abroad. Why do you always have to pick
holes in everything I say?
Here are some criticisms of people:
I think Antonio’s being totally absurd. [ridiculous] You are undoubtedly at fault / to blame and
you should apologise. [you are in the wrong] She thinks she’s the cat’s whiskers /ˈwɪskəz// the
bee’s knees. [thinks she’s wonderful] When it comes to time-keeping, he’s the world’s worst.
[no one is worse] Jack is so rude. He really takes the biscuit. [is a striking example of some negative
quality] Jo wants to have her cake and eat it! [wants everything with no contribution from her side]
102 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
48.1 Which expressions from the opposite page might these pictures help you to remember?
have your cake1 2 3 4 5
and eat it
48.2 Using the word in brackets and an expression from A opposite, rewrite the sentence
without changing the meaning.
1 The hotel we were staying in was absolutely superb. (world)
The hotel we were staying in was out of this world.
2 Giovanni is a long way above the other kids when it comes to doing hard sums. (shoulders)
3 Maria is very good with young children - they always love her. (way)
4 You’re a long way ahead of me in understanding all this new technology; I’m impressed. (streets)
5 Hassan is great at chess. (brilliantly)
6 Agata is a very fluent and confident speaker. (gab)
48.3 Which of the expressions in 48.1 is most suitable for completing each sentence if
you want to:
really takes the biscuit!1 say someone’s behaviour is extremely annoying? What Jack said
2 say that someone is quick to understand? Tanya is usually
3 say someone has a very high opinion of themselves? Rajiv thinks
4 praise someone’s gardening skills? Marek
5 comment on someone who wants to buy a new car but keep all their savings too? Unfortunately,
you
48.4 Answer these questions.
It's serious.1 If someone is critically injured, is their injury minor or serious?
2 If your teacher asks you to write a review criticising a film you’ve recently seen, does she want you
only to write about its negative aspects?
3 If a father is critical of his son’s behaviour, does he approve or disapprove of it?
4 If someone says that it is ‘critically important’that you complete a piece of work by a specific
deadline, how flexible is that deadline?
5 If several people are said to be in a critical condition after an accident, are doctors worried or not
particularly worried about them?
48.5 Write the opposite meaning to these sentences using expressions from the opposite page.
1 He’s a third-rate athlete. He’s a first-rate / top-notch athlete.
2 I don’tunderstand why Sophie has such a low opinion of herself.
3 When it comes to sport, Andrey is one of the best in his school.
4 Greta was not responsible for the error in the accounting figures.
5 He is no good at talking to people at all.
6 Mick doesn’tget on with the secretaries; just look at how they react when he wants something done.
7 He often says how wonderful his school is.
8 She always praises everything I say.49
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 103
