Expressions with set and put92
A Phrasal verbs based on set
Since his daughter’s birth, Robert had been setting aside1 money for her wedding. Now he and
his wife were setting off2 to meet Carl, her new fiancé. Carl was a mountaineer who had set
out3 several times to climb Mount Everest but had had to turn back because bad weather had
set off4 avalanches. Now he was trying to set up5 a sports equipment business. Robert didn’t
altogether like the sound of Carl but he was doing his best to set aside6 his negative feelings.
1 reserving 2 beginning a journey 3 begun something with a particular aim in mind4 caused
5 establish 6 ignore (not think about)
B Phrasal verbs with put
Note: It would not normally be natural to use all of these expressions together.
Emma put her own name forward1 for election to the staff committee. Ten other people had
also put in2 proposal forms but Emma was elected because she is very good at putting her
ideas across3. She also has a talent for putting her opponents down4. At the first meeting she
was largely silent though occasionally she would put in5 a remark.
At the next meeting she was more involved. She supported the proposal that central heating
should be put in6 in the staff canteen and agreed to help put together7 some new flat-
pack furniture for the canteen. She also voted for the local school being allowed to use
the staff club to put on8 a play. She insisted that the play would not put staff out9 at all
provided that the school put all their props away10 after each performance. She said that she
would put up11 relatives coming from other towns to watch the play. She argued that the
committee should put off12 making their decision about putting up13 staff club membership
subscriptions until they had found out how staff felt about this. She agreed to put up14
posters encouraging all staff to come to the next committee meeting.
Later that evening Emma made her mother laugh as she imitated other committee members -
she’s good at putting on15 all sorts of accents. ‘The chairperson really put me off16 with his
constant sniffing,’ she said, ‘and I don’t know how they put up with17 the secretary’s rudeness.’
1 proposed 2 submitted 3 communicating 4 making someone look small 5 say something
6 installed 7 assemble 8 present 9 inconvenience 10 tidied 11 give accommodation to
12 postpone 13 raising 14 display 15 pretending to have 16 distracted 17 tolerate
C Expressions with set and put
He has set his heart/sights on becoming a ballet dancer. [longs to become]
I’ve set myself a target of losing five kilos by the end of the year. [am aiming to lose]
They sat up till the small hours setting/putting the world to rights. [discussing important problems]
Did someone set fire to the house deliberately? [put a match to]
The prisoner will be set free tomorrow. [released]
Lottie had never set foot in Italy before. [been to]
The Egyptian runner has set a new world record. [established an achievement record]
Teachers have to try to set a good example for young people. [be a good example]
to put your foot down: to be firm about something
to put pressure on someone: to try to force someone to do something
to put your mind to: to direct all your thoughts towards
to put two and two together: to draw an obvious conclusion
to put an end / a stop to something: to cause something to stop
to put someone’s back up: to irritate someone
a put-up job: something arranged to give a false impression
190 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
92.1 Put the following sentences into slightly more formal English by replacing the phrasal
verbs with their formal equivalents.
1 They have recently set up a committee on teenage smoking.
They have recently established a committee on teenage smoking.
2 We try to set aside some money for our holiday every week.
3 Set aside all your negative feelings and listen with an open mind.
4 If we hadn’tset off so late, we would have arrived on time.
5 The government’s unpopular proposals set off a wave of protests.
92.2 Write three nouns which could follow each of the verbs. Remember that their meanings
might be different depending on the noun which follows.
1 put in money / a comment / an effort
2 put forward
3 put off
4 put across
5 put up
6 put on
7 put away
8 put up with
92.3 Write responses to the following statements or questions using any appropriate phrasal
verb from A or B opposite.
1 He’s always so rude. I wouldn't put up with it if I were you.
2 This room is in a terrible mess.
3 What time do we have to leave for the airport tomorrow?
4 Any chance of a bed on your floor this weekend?
5 Why have you suddenly lost interest in the project?
6 What is Adam planning to do when he gets his business degree?
7 How should we publicise our play?
8 I’ve taken all the bits for my new desk out of the pack but now I don’tknow where to start.
92.4 Using the expressions in C opposite, reword the following sentences without changing
their meaning.
1 They have promised to liberate the hostages at noon.
They have promised to set the hostages free at noon.
2 He’s bound to draw the obvious conclusion if you keep on behaving like that.
3 Her aim is to become Prime Minister.
4 I find her terribly irritating.
5 If you try to make her change her mind it’llmake her even more determined.
6 Please concentrate on the problem in hand.
7 She is determined to get a seat in Parliament.
8 She threw petrol on the rubbish and put a match to it.
9 It’s time the teacher told the children to stop making so much noise.
10 The man has officially eaten more burgers in one hour than anyone else.
11 This is the first time I’ve ever been to the southern hemisphere.
12 We spent most of our evenings discussing the problems of the world rather than studying.
13 You really should be firm with him or there’llbe trouble later.
14 If the teacher doesn’tbehave properly, the children certainly won’t.
15 His goal is to run the Athens marathon next year.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 191
