62 Condition
A Words connecting sentence parts
In addition to if, there are several other words and phrases for expressing condition.
1 You can’tcome in unless you have a ticket. 2 You can borrow the bike on condition that
[... if you do not have a ticket] you return it by five o’clock.
3 In case of fire, dial 112. [When there is ...; usually seen on notices; you can also say in the event of]
4 You can stay, as/so long as you don’tmind sleeping on the sofa. (as long as is less formal than so long as
and less formal and not so strong as on condition that)
5 Provided/Providing you don’tmind cats, you can stay with us. (providing (that) or provided (that) can
also be used in examples 2 and 4; they are less formal and not so strong as on condition that but stronger and
more restricting than as/so long as)
Language help
Don’t confuse in case of with in case. Take your umbrella in case it rains means ‘It isn’t
raining but it might rain.’
B Supposing ... and What if ...
Note the use of supposing and what if (both usually found in spoken language) for possible situations in
the future. What if is more direct.
Mick: Ethan’s coming tomorrow. He’llhelp us.
Alice: Supposing / What if he doesn’tturn up - what shall we do then?
C Conditions with -ever
The -ever su ix means ‘itdoes not matter which ... ’. The stress is normally on ever.
What’s the best way to travel in your country?
However you decide to travel in this country, it’llcost you a lot of money.
For example, you’llend up paying at least 70 euros, whichever means of
transport you take from the airport to the city centre - train or bus. Public
transport is expensive wherever you go here. Whoever wins the next
election should try to lower fares.
These sentences can also be expressed using no matter. Note the stress.
No matter how you decide to travel in this country, it will cost you a lot of money.
No matter who wins the next election, they should try to lower fares.
Common mistakes
With the condition phrases in A, B and C the present tense is used in the conditional clause. Take a
jacket in case it gets cold later on. (NOT Take a jacket in case it will get cold later on.)
Some nouns which express conditionD
Certain conditions must be met before the peace talks can begin. (rather formal)
A good standard of English is a prerequisite /priːˈrekwɪzɪt/for studying at a British university.
[absolutely necessary; very formal] What are the entry requirements /rəˈkwaɪəmənts/for doing
a diploma in Management at your college? [o icial conditions; rather formal] I would not move to
London under any circumstances. (fairly formal)
130 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
62.1 Fill the gaps with a suitable word or phrase from A and B opposite.
as long as1 You can come to the party you don’tbring that awful friend of yours.
2 emergency in the machine room, sound the alarm and notify
the supervisor at once.
3 I hear from you, I’llassume you are coming.
4 A person may take the driving test again they have not already taken a test
within the previous 14 days.
5 I lent you my car, would that help?
62.2 Change the sentences with -ever to no matter, and vice versa.
1 Wherever she goes, she always takes that dog of hers.
No matter where she goes, she always takes that dog of hers.
2 If anyone rings, I don’twant to speak to them, no matter who it is.
3 No matter what I do, I always seem to do the wrong thing.
4 It’llprobably have meat in it, whichever dish you choose. They don’tcater for
vegetarians here.
5 No matter how I do it, that recipe never seems to work.
6 However hard you try, you’llnever be able to do it all on your own.
62.3 The pictures show conditions that must be met to do certain things. Make different
sentences using words and phrases from the opposite page.
EXAMPLE 1 You can have a passenger on a motorbike provided they wear a helmet. / Unless you wear a helmet,
you can't ride on a motorbike.
1 2 3
4 5 6
62.4 Over to you
What would your answers be to these questions?
1 Are there any prerequisites for the job you do or would like to do in the future?
2 Under what circumstances would you move from where you’re living at the moment?
3 What are the normal entry requirements for university in your country?
4 On what condition would you lend a friend your house/flat?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 131
