Uncountable nouns83
A What are uncountable nouns?
Countable nouns can be used with a/an and made plural (e.g. a hat, two hats). Uncountable
nouns are not normally used with a(n) or the plural, e.g. information (NOT an information or some
informations). You can learn uncountable nouns in groups associated with the same subject or area.
Here are some useful headings.
B Travel
luggage accommodation money information transport
baggage (more currency
common than
luggage in AmE) Language help
Travel is an uncountable noun, e.g. Travel
C Food broadens the mind. If you want to refer to
an individual occasion of travel, useThe word food is usually uncountable, and so are many journey or trip, e.g. It was a very longfood names. Other uncountable food words can be journey. (NOT a very long travel) Sheadded to this list. was away on a business trip for three
sugar rice spaghetti butter bread days. (NOT a business travel)
flour soup
Abstract uncountable nouns and nouns for activitiesD
She gave me some advice on how to study for the exam.
I picked up some interesting knowledge on that course.
She’s made a lot of progress in a very short time.
She has done some research on marine life.
They’ve done a lot of work on the project.
The teacher always gives us homework at the weekend.
Do you have any experience of working with children?
Wealth [state of being rich] does not guarantee happiness, but neither does poverty. [state of
being poor]
E Material and resources
For making clothes, furniture, etc.: cloth (e.g. silk) leather For energy: coal oil
For buildings: stone brick plastic General: equipment software
F Other common uncountable nouns
I have some news for you: Henry is getting married.
What lovely weather! Let’s go for a walk.
Common mistakes
Although you may have learnt these words and their meanings before, it is very easy to continue
making mistakes with them.
We say: What terrible weather! I have some news for you. We bought some new furniture.
(NOT What a terrible weather! I have a news for you. We bought some new furnitures.)
See Unit 86 for ways of making uncountable nouns countable.
172 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
83.1 Complete each sentence in two ways using the nouns in brackets.
1 He gave me (some) advice / some tips about applying for university courses. (advice / tip)
2 I’m sorry, I can’tcome. I have to do. (job / homework)
3 She’s doing teenage slang in English for her university project.
(research into / study of)
4 You’llneed if you want to make a Chinese meal. (rice / noodle)
5 I have for you: you’re going to meet the President next week!
(news / surprise)
6 They make for the furniture industry in this factory. (textile / cloth)
83.2 List these words under the headings in the table: uncountables and countables. Then pair
up the words which have related meanings.
recommendation money bread case information job advice travel
coin trip work baggage fact loaf
uncountables money
countables coin
83.3 Correct the mistakes in these sentences. There may be more than one.
some
1 We had such a terrible weather that we left the campsite and found an accommodation in town
instead.
2 In the south of England, most houses are made of stones, but in the north, bricks are more
common.
3 I love antique furnitures, but I would need an advice from a specialist before I bought any. My
knowledges in that area are very poor.
4 Her researches are definitely making great progresses these days. She has done a lot of original
works recently.
5 What equipments do you need to go skiing? If you can give me any informations, I would be grateful.
6 Oil exports have produced a great deal of wealths for the country.
7 Package holidays often include transports from the airport to your accommodations.
8 I don’thave any experiences of working in education, but I would like to do some voluntary works in
a school.
9 A poverty is the biggest problem in many countries.
10 I bought a new software that shows you the kind of weathers every country has each month of the
year.
83.4 Can you add more items to the lists in C and E opposite?
olive oil, salt, milk, honeyFood:
For making clothes, furniture, etc.:
For buildings:
For energy:
83.5 Over to you
Imagine you are going away for a week’s holiday and you pack a suitcase with everything you need.
Make a list of what you would pack. Which items on your list are uncountable nouns in English?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 173
