Obligation, need, possibility and probability55
A Obligation
You will be liable /ˈlaɪəbl/for any damage when you rent
a car. [obliged to pay; fml/legalistic]
The company is obliged to give a refund if the tour is
cancelled.
The bank robbers forced him at gunpoint to open the safe.
We had no choice/alternative but to sell our house; we
owed the bank £100,000.
The death sentence is mandatory /ˈmændətəri/ for drug-
smuggling in some countries. [automatic; there is no alternative]
Was sport compulsory/obligatory at your school? No, it
was optional. [you can choose]
I am exempt from paying income tax as I’m a student. [free from obligation]
B Need
This plant is in need of water. (more formal than ‘needs/wants’)
There’s a need for more discussion on the matter. [we feel a need; fml]
There is a shortage of teachers. [there are not enough]
She could not concentrate through lack of sleep. [she had none or not
enough; fml]
A car is an absolute necessity if you live in the countryside and there is no
public transport. [something you must have] You just can’tdo without one.
[survive or live without]
What are the requirements for a Master’s course in English? [things you
must do or need]
C Possibilities
I’ve been given an opportunity to work in Berlin. [a real chance]
Is there any chance/possibility you’llbe free next week? (chance is less formal than possibility)
A rise in oil prices is inevitable as oil supplies run out across the world. [is certain to happen]
It is doubtful whether the economy will improve next year. [it may not improve]
It is probable that the next government will change the tax laws.
Most scientists believe that climate change is no longer just a possibility but is now an absolute
certainty.
Common mistakes
The correct preposition after the noun need is for, not of. There is a need for more qualified teachers.
(NOT There is a need of ...)
116 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
55.1 Match the sentence beginnings on the left with the endings on the right.
e1 The club closed down a of repairs and redecoration.
2 People could not heat their homes b for university entry on the website.
3 Most people cannot do c because of the oil shortage.
4 There is a real need d for better day care for young children.
5 There is a list of requirements e through lack of interest.
6 The whole house is in need f without a mobile phone these days.
55.2 Continue the sentences using obligation words and phrases from A opposite with the
words in brackets.
was forced/obliged to close down.1 They were losing £10 million a year, so the company
(close down)
2 You don’thave to buy the travel insurance; it’s
(extra charge)
3 You can borrow the camcorder, but you will
(for any damage to it)
4 We’llhave to sell the house. I’m afraid we have
(otherwise, bankrupt)
5 He didn’twant to give them the money, but they had guns; they
(hand it over)
6 No, he couldn’tchoose to pay a fine; a prison sentence is
(for dangerous driving)
7 I didn’twant to do maths, but I had to. It’s
(in all secondary schools)
8 If you’re unemployed, you’re (paying tax)
55.3 Answer the questions.
1 If a fee or charge is mandatory, do you have to pay it or can you choose? You have to pay it.
2 If an event is inevitable, how certain is it that it will happen? 20%, 50% or 100%?
3 If a car is exempt from tax, how much tax do you have to pay for it?
4 If an exam is optional, are you obliged to take it?
5 If you are liable for something, is it your or someone else’s responsibility?
55.4 Rewrite the words in bold using expressions from the opposite page.
1 Most people consider that a mobile phone is not a luxury but something you absolutely must have.
an absolute necessity / something you can't do without
2 I have been given a chance to work with a team of zoologists in East Africa.
3 Is there any chance that you will be free to join us at 4 pm tomorrow?
4 It’s not at all sure whether there will be any change in the situation in the near future.
5 It’s not just a possibility that food prices will go up, it’s absolutely certain to happen.
6 She will probably arrive tomorrow.
55.5 Over to you
Name something which ...
1 you think is inevitable.
2 there is a need for in your country.
3 was compulsory when you were at school.
4 you personally are in need of right now.
5 you own that you couldn’t do without.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 117
