32 Holidays
Places to stay and types of holidayA
campsite: a place where you can pitch a tent or park a caravan
self-catering flat/apartment: a flat which you rent; you cook for yourself
guesthouse: accommodation like a hotel but cheaper and with fewer services
youth hostel: cheap accommodation, mainly for young people, with, perhaps, ten or more people
sleeping in bunk beds in one room
package holiday: a holiday in which you pay for travel, accommodation and food (even occasionally
excursions) in advance
cruise: a holiday spent touring (or cruising) on a boat, stopping off to go sightseeing at different ports
an adventure holiday: a holiday involving unusual, exciting and possibly dangerous activities -
suitable for adventurous people
Holiday messagesB
Reply Forward
Dear Zara
Having a wonderful holiday. It’s so nice to get
away1. We’re staying at an amazing campsite 1 go somewhere different
up in the mountains. It’s very remote2 and we 2 far from other places
had to drive up an unbelievably winding3 road 3 with lots of bends, not at
to get here. But once we made it, the views 4 all aroundall straightover the surrounding4 countryside made the 5 very frighteningterrifying5 drive worthwhile. I'm sending a
photo of our camping spot.
Love, Sami
Reply Forward
Dear Nico
This is turning out to be probably the most 1 one that will always be
memorable1 holiday I’ve ever had. The remembered (a memorable
town is absolutely fascinating2 with lots holiday is a strong
of very impressive3 buildings. Our hotel is 2 extremelycollocation)
delightful4 - if a little inconvenient5 from 3 grand,interesting
the transport point of view - and the food making an impactin this area is exceptional6. These are 4 charming 5 hard to getsome of the old buildings in the town. 6 unusually goodto
Wish you were here too!
Francesca
Holiday brochuresC
These are often written in quite exaggerated language. Here are some typical adjectives with nouns
that they collocate with.
breathtaking views / scenery / pistes (ski slopes) [breathtaking (like stunning) suggests that something is
so magnificent that it takes your breath away]
exclusive access / club / shops [only the most special people can use the facilities]
exhilarating feeling / ride / walk [makes you feel excited and full of energy]
exotic beauty / charm / location [unusual and more exciting than your everyday reality]
glamorous surroundings / film star / hotel [especially exciting and attractive]
luxurious cruise ship / accommodation / lifestyle [provides great comfort]
picturesque streets / villages / cottage [very pretty; attractive to look at - as pretty as a picture]
unspoilt charm / village / woodland [still in a beautiful and natural state]
unique opportunity / charm / facilities [so special it does not exist anywhere else]
70 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
32.1 Complete this table. Use a dictionary to help you, if necessary.
adjective noun verb
fascinationfascinating
delightful
exhilarating
glamorous
luxurious
32.2 Fill in the gaps in this holiday message with appropriate adjectives from the opposite page.
Reply Forward
Hi,
fascinatingAm having a wonderful holiday here. The town here is very old and quite 1 . The
guidebook says it is remarkable for its 2 charm and it is right! It is surrounded by
magnificent mountains and yesterday I went for an 3 climb. Even though it isn’t too
expensive, the hotel is quite 4 and the view from my balcony is 5 .
Wish you were here!
Love, P
32.3 Complete these sentences with a word from the opposite page.
bunk1 At the youth hostel Anya insisted on sleeping in the top .
2 As soon as we got to the campsite we our tent.
3 Visitors to our hotel have access to our own private beach.
4 It’s often cheaper to go on a holiday, where everything is paid for in advance.
5 I’d love to hire a boat and spend a month round the Mediterranean, wouldn’tyou?
6 I wouldn’trecommend that hotel. It’s extremely ; it’s seven miles to the nearest beach
and ten miles to the town.
7 Our trip to South Africa was undoubtedly the most holiday I’ve ever had.
8 A narrow road led up the mountain to the cottage we’d rented.
32.4 Which of the adjectives from C could describe each of these?
an exclusive club1 a club which only a select group of members can go to
2 a hotel with very expensive facilities and very attentive staff
3 a village with very pretty buildings and lots of flowers
4 a view from the top of a mountain over a magnificent landscape
5 the opportunity to go on a once-in-a-lifetime holiday
6 a walk along a windswept beach
32.5 Over to you
Answer these questions. Write sentences.
1 Which of the holiday places and types of holiday in A have you or your friends experienced?
2 Which would you prefer and why - a holiday in the centre of a historic city or one in a remote
village with spectacular surrounding countryside?
3 What’s the most memorable holiday you’ve ever had?
4 Which would you say is the most impressive city you’ve visited?
5 What would you say is the most fascinating place you’ve been to?
6 Have you ever had a holiday experience you’d describe as terrifying?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 71
