Texture, brightness, weight and density59
A Texture - how something feels when you touch it
adjective typical examples
smooth /smuːð/ the paper in this book
polished varnished wood; a shiny metal surface
silky silk itself; fine, expensive tights or stockings
slippery a fish just out of the water
furry /ˈfɜːri/ a thick sheepskin rug
rough /rʌf/ new, unwashed denim jeans; bark of a tree
coarse /kɔːs/ sand
jagged /ˈʤægɪd/ sharp, irregular edges of broken glass or metal
prickly a thistle; a cactus; thorns on a rose
Your hair has a silky feel. This cotton is very smooth to the touch. The table had a beautiful polished
surface. /ˈsɜːfɪs/The ground was rough underfoot.
B Brightness
a shady corner of the garden carnival costumes full of vivid colours
a dazzling lightshiny leather shoes
You wear such dull colours - why don’tyou start wearing bright colours for a change?
The light’s too dim to read in here. We need another lamp.
I wear sunglasses when I drive because of the glare of the sun.
C Density and weight
A solid ≠ hollow object. She has thick ≠ thin/fine hair.
An area with dense ≠ sparse vegetation.
Your bag’s as light as a feather! Have you brought enough clothes?
Your bag’s as heavy as lead! What’s in it? Bricks?
This suitcase is very bulky/cumbersome. /ˈkʌmbəsəm/[difficult, big and heavy]
124 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
59.1 Which adjectives from A opposite could describe the texture of these things?
1 A new cotton T-shirt. smooth
2 Heavy, stone-ground wholemeal flour.
3 A wet bar of soap.
4 The branches of a rose bush.
5 A gravel pathway.
6 The inside of a pair of sheepskin gloves.
7 The edge of a piece of broken, rusty metal.
8 The surface of a mirror.
9 A silk scarf.
10 An empty sack.
59.2 Rewrite the sentences. Look at the words in bold and follow the instructions in brackets.
The material had a metallic feel.1 The material felt metallic. (change to noun)
2 The cloth was rough when you touched it. (change to noun)
3 We sat in a part of the garden where there was shade. (change to adjective)
4 Suddenly there was a light which dazzled everyone. (change to adjective)
5 The ground was very wet under our feet. (change to adverb)
6 My suitcase weighs very little. (use feather)
59.3 Match the sentence beginnings on the left with the endings on the right.
e1 We walked through the jungle vegetation, a which was hollow.
2 We found it inside an old tree, b which was absolutely solid.
3 We loved the new colour, c which was as heavy as lead.
4 We examined the desert vegetation, d which was very vivid.
5 We tried to drill into the rock, e which was very dense.
6 We couldn’tlift the box, f which was very sparse.
59.4 What could you do if ...
1 your reading lamp was rather dim? get a brighter one
2 you were fed up with the dull colour of the walls in your room?
3 you found the glare of the sun uncomfortable?
4 you wanted your shoes to be shiny?
5 your rucksack was too bulky or cumbersome?
59.5 Over to you
Look round your own home and find ...
1 something soft to the touch. 4 something furry.
2 something rough underfoot. 5 something smooth.
3 something with a polished surface.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 125
