Movement and speed58
A Particular types of movement
Move is the basic verb for all movement, but don’tforget it also means ‘to move to a new house/flat’,
e.g. We’ve moved. Do you want our new address?
Cars, lorries, etc. travel/drive along roads.
Trains travel along rails.
Boats/ships sail on rivers / across the sea.
Rivers/streams flow/run through towns/villages.
Things often have particular verbs associated with their types of movement. You should learn
these as typical collocations when you meet them, and record them with a phrase or sentence,
for example:
The car swerved /swɜːvd/ to avoid a dog which had
run into the road. [moved suddenly to the side]
White clouds drifted across the sky. [moved slowly]
The flag fluttered in the wind. [moved gently from
side to side]
The leaves stirred /stɜːd/in the light breeze.
[moved slightly]
The trees swayed back and forth as the wind grew
stronger. [moved slowly from side to side]
Verbs to describe fast and slow movementB
The traffic was crawling along because of the roadworks. [moving very slowly]
Stop dawdling! /ˈdɔːdlɪŋ/We’llbe late! [moving more slowly than is necessary]
Suddenly a car came round the bend and tore along the road at high speed.
Seconds later, a police car shot past after it.
Everyone was hurrying/rushing to get their shopping done before closing time.
The train was just creeping along at about 20 miles per hour. I knew we’d be late.
[moving very slowly]
The donkey was plodding along the road. [plodding suggests heavy, often tired, movement]
The plane was cruising at a height of 30,000 metres. [travelling at a steady speed]
Nouns to describe speed and their typical contextsC
speed is a general word used for vehicles, developments, changes, etc., e.g. We were travelling at
high speed.
rate is often used in statistical contexts; the rate of increase/decrease, e.g. The birth rate is going
down.
pace shows how you experience something as happening fast or slow, e.g. The lesson was going at a
very slow pace.
velocity /vəˈlɒsɪti /is used in technical/scientific contexts, e.g. The velocity of a moving object.
Common mistakes
We say at a speed/rate/pace. (NOT in or with a speed/rate/pace)
The train was travelling at a speed of 120 kph. (NOT The train was travelling with a speed of 120 kph.)
122 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
58.1 Pair up the sentences on the left with the ones on the right so they make sense.
c1 That tree was swaying back and forth a It sails at dawn.
in the wind.
2 The cruise liner is leaving tomorrow. b It flows through the capital city.
3 A cat ran out in front of my car. c It was moving so much I thought it would break
altogether.
4 The most famous river in France is d It was travelling at 160 kph at the time.
the Seine.
5 A train came off the rails yesterday. e I had to swerve hard and nearly ended up in the
river.
58.2 What other things do you think could be described by each verb apart from the contexts
given opposite? Use a dictionary, if necessary.
someone dancing, someone walking on a ship in a rough sea, someone who's drunk1 sway: a tree,
2 crawl: traffic,
3 shoot: a car,
4 flutter: a flag,
5 drift: a cloud,
58.3 Fill the gaps with speed, rate, pace or velocity. Use the guidelines opposite to help you.
1 The rate of decline in this species is alarming.
2 I just couldn’tstand the of life in the city, so I moved to a small village.
3 The teacher asked the students to calculate the of a series of objects dropped from a
specific height.
4 A: What were you doing at the time? B: Oh, about 60 kph, I’d say.
5 The company is showing an impressive of growth.
58.4 Correct the error in each sentence.
crept1 Pierre creeped down the stairs making as little noise as possible.
2 We were making progress but only in a very slow pace.
3 The baby stired but didn’twake up.
4 The old man swerved a little but didn’tfall over.
5 Trains can travel with a much faster speed than buses.
58.5 Use a dictionary to make notes to help you learn the difference between these near
synonyms. Make notes under the headings usage and grammar, as in the example.
usage grammar
fast e.g. fast car / fast train - refers to speed adjective and adverb - 'she drove fast'
quick
rapid
swift
58.6 Over to you
In what situations might you ...
1 tear out of the house? 4 not even dare to stir?
2 deliberately dawdle? 5 shoot past someone’s office/room?
3 plod along at a steady pace? 6 creep around the house?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 123
