The language of signs and notices99
Signs and notices in English often use words and expressions that are rarely seen in
other contexts. Look at the signs and notices below with their ‘translations’into more everyday
English.
1 6 11
Get off here for Buckingham Young people under 18 years What is in this packet is
Palace. old can only come in if they officially considered bad
are with an adult. for your health.
2 7 12
Start going more
People who walk on slowly now.You are not allowed to
this private land will be feed the animals.
taken to court.
3 8 13
Buy a ticket and put itThere is no way out at the in a place where it can
other end of this road forPlease don’tuse mobile easily be seen.cars.phones in the theatre/hall.
4 9 14
You can be taken to court You may not enter without Cyclists should get
and made to pay £1,000 for permission or if you do not off their bikes here.
dropping rubbish. work here.
5 10 15
You can buy lunch here
now. Only people with specialPlease put the things you are cards giving themgoing to buy / have bought permission are allowedhere. to fish here.
204 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
99.1 Where would you expect to see each of the notices on the opposite page?
EXAMPLE 1 on a bus
99.2 Match the words on the left with their meanings on the right.
c1 to prosecute a a young person under the age of 18
2 a penalty b to get off a bicycle or a horse
3 a purchase c to bring a legal case against
4 a trespasser d not to do something
5 to refrain e to forbid something
6 to alight from f a means of transport
7 to prohibit g a punishment
8 an auditorium h something which has been or is to be bought
9 to dismount i to get off a means of public transport
10 a minor j a large place where an audience sits
11 a vehicle k someone who goes on private land without permission
99.3 Where might you see each of these notices? Explain what they mean.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
99.4 What notice would a café -owner or a shop-owner put up if they wanted to:
Breakfast now being served1 indicate that their café was now open for breakfast?
2 let people know that the staff can speak Spanish?
3 prohibit people under 18 from entering unless they are with an adult?
4 ask customers not to enter the kitchen or the work area?
5 announce that they will take people who steal anything to court?
6 ask people politely not to handle the food or goods?
99.5 Over to you
Look at the notices in your own language that you see around you every day. How would they be
expressed in English? Try to find out, if they are not included in this unit. Also, look out for any signs in
English in non-English-speaking countries. See if you can work out what they mean.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 205
