Linking words in writing68
A Organising a formal text
First / Firstly / First of all, we must consider ...
Next, it is important to remember that ...
Secondly and thirdly are also used with first/firstly for lists.
Finally/Lastly, we should recall that ... (coming to the final point on a list)
Turning to the question of foreign policy, ... (changing to a new topic)
Leaving aside the question of pollution, there are also other reasons ... (the writer will not deal with
that question here)
In parenthesis, let us not forget that ... (making a point that is a side issue, not part of the main argument)
In summary / To sum up, we may state that ... (listing / summing up the main points)
In sum, the economic issues are at the centre of this debate ... (listing / summing up the main points:
much more formal)
In conclusion / To conclude, I should like to point out that ... (finishing the text)
Common mistakes
Lastly is used when making a final point, e.g. Lastly, let us consider what the future holds. (NOT At last let
us consider ...) At last means finally after a long time, e.g. At last I’ve finished my essay - what a relief!
Linking words for explaining, exemplifying, rephrasing, etc.B
To learn new words properly a lot of recycling is needed; in other words / that is to say, you have to
study the same words over and over again. (that is to say is much more formal)
Some English words are hard to pronounce, for example / for instance, ‘eighth’.
It might be possible, say, to include the parents in the discussion. (similar to for example; note the
commas before and after; say is also common in spoken English)
The Parliament has different committees. Briefly, these consist of two main types. [the explanation
will be short and not comprehensive]
She is, so to speak / as it were, living in a world of her own. (makes what you are saying sound less
definite/precise; as it were is more formal)
Referring backwards and forwards in the textC
The following points will be covered in this essay: ... (used to introduce a list)
It was stated above/earlier that the history of the USA is ... [earlier in the text]
See page 238 for more information. [go to page 238]
Many writers have claimed this (see below). [examples will be given later in the text]
A full list is given overleaf. [turn the page and you will find the list]
For further details/discussion, see Chapter 4. [more discussion/details]
May I refer you to page 3 of my last letter to you? [May I ask you to look at / read; fml]
With reference to your email of 12th March, ... (often used at the beginning of a letter or email to link it
with an earlier text; fml)
142 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
68.1 Match the linking words on the left with the appropriate function on the right.
1 Leaving aside ... c a change the topic
2 In parenthesis, ... b read something earlier in the text
3 Turning to ... c this will not be discussed
4 In conclusion, ... d this document is about another one
5 With reference to ... e to finish off
6 See above ... f as an aside / as a secondary issue
68.2 Fill the gaps with typical linking words or phrases used in writing. The first letter of each
phrase/word is given.
Firstly1 , it is important to understand why people commit crimes; 2i , what are
the motives which make people do things they would never normally do? 3F ,
a young man steals clothes from a shop - does he do it because it is an exciting risk? 4N ,
it is essential to consider whether punishment makes any difference, or is it just,5a , a kind
of revenge? 6L , how can we help victims of crime?7I , how can we get to
the roots of the problem, rather than just attacking the symptoms?
Which linking word or phrase(s) ...68.3
say (meaning ‘for example’)1 is based on the verb ‘to say’?
2 is based on the verb ‘to follow’?
3 contain the word/syllable ‘sum’?(three answers)
4 is a form of the word ‘far’?
5 contains something you find on trees?
68.4 Write a short formal email to the Editor of a newspaper about a report in the paper the
previous week that a local hospital is going to close. You think the hospital should not
close because:
• The nearest other hospital is 50 kilometres away.
• 200 people work at the hospital; they will lose their jobs.
• The hospital makes an important contribution to the local economy.
• It is the only hospital in the region with a special cancer unit.
• It is being closed for political reasons, not genuine economic ones.
Try to include as many as possible of these linking
words and phrases:
with reference to firstly, secondly, thirdly, etc.
leaving aside the following to sum up
that is to say finally
Dear Editor,
Yours sincerely,
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 143
