What your body does47
Verbs connected with the mouth and breathingA
yawn: Why are you yawning? Are you feeling sleepy?
sneeze: Dust often makes me sneeze.
snore: He snored in his chair with his mouth wide open.
cough: It was so smoky in the room that he couldn’tstop coughing.
sigh: She sighed with relief when she heard the plane had landed safely.
be out of breath: I ran for the bus and now I’m out of breath!
take a deep breath: He took a deep breath and jumped into the water.
hold your breath: How long can you hold your breath underwater?
B Verbs connected with eating
chew: My granny used to say you should chew every mouthful ten times.
rumble: It’s embarrassing if your stomach rumbles during an interview.
swallow: Take a drink of water to help you swallow the pills.
suck: In an aeroplane, if you suck a sweet, it can stop your ears popping.
lick: The cat licked the bowl clean.
bite: Don’tbite that hard sweet - you’lldamage your teeth.
C Verbs connected with the eyes and face
wink: He winked at me across the room to try
to make me laugh.
frown: Why are you frowning? What’s the
problem? wink
grin: She was so delighted with the present grin
that she grinned from ear to ear.
blink: She blinked several times to try and get
the dust out of her eye.
blush: He blushed with embarrassment when she smiled
at him.
D Verbs connected with the whole body sweat
perspire/sweat /swet/: When it’s hot, you sweat/
perspire. (perspire is more formal)
shiver: Look at him! He’s so cold that he’s shivering!
tremble: My hands tremble when I’ve been drinking
too much coffee.
shake: She laughed so much that her whole body shook.
frown shiverLanguage help
All the verbs on this page (except shake and bite) are regular verbs; almost all the words have an
identical noun form: to yawn → a yawn, to cough → a cough /kɒf/ etc. (except to breathe /briːð/
and to perspire; their nouns are breath /breθ/ and perspiration).
100 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
47.1 Which of the words on the opposite page do these pictures illustrate?
1 blush 2 3 4 5
47.2 Complete the sentences with verbs from A opposite.
shivering1 I could see she was extremely cold because she was .
2 I sensed that he was feeling sad because he .
3 She couldn’tsleep all night because her husband was .
4 The fumes from all the cars and lorries were horrible and made me .
5 I knew I had caught a cold because I started .
6 The doctor examined my chest and asked me to .
7 Put your head underwater and see how many seconds you can .
8 We started running fast and soon we were both .
47.3 The Trubble family are at a restaurant and things are not going well. Fill the gaps with
verbs from B opposite.
MRS TRUBBLE: Where’s our food? My stomach is 1 rumbling . What slow service! Edward,
stop making that horrible noise with your drink! People are looking at us.
EDWARD: It’s my straw. It’s broken and I can’t2 through it properly.
MR TRUBBLE: Ouch! I just 3 an olive and I’ve broken my tooth on the stone! Look!
MRS TRUBBLE: Mm. So ... where’s the stone?
MR TRUBBLE: Oh dear. I think I 4 it!
47.4 Find the word to match these definitions.
frown1 Draw the eyebrows together to express displeasure or puzzlement.
2 Crush food into smaller, softer pieces with the teeth so you can swallow it.
3 Your body makes small, quick movements because you are laughing so much.
4 Shut and open both eyes quickly.
5 Deliberately shut and open one eye.
6 Use your tongue to take in food (e.g. on an ice-cream cone).
47.5 Circle the correct word to complete the sentences.
1 We worked hard in the hot sun. Soon we were trembling / perspiring / shivering.
2 He seemed very amused. He was trembling / blushing / grinning.
3 She sucked / licked / bit the stamp and stuck it on the envelope.
4 I always find it difficult to swallow / suck / chew medicines.
5 It was so funny! I was just trembling / shaking / shivering with laughter!
6 The poor little animal was shivering / trembling / grinning with fear.
7 It was so hot and humid. Soon my shirt was soaked with perspire / perspiration / perspitation.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 101
