Multi-word expressions79
Learning and remembering multi-word expressionsA
Fixed expressions, also known as idioms, often have meanings that are not clear or obvious. For
example, the expression to feel under the weather, which means ‘to feel unwell’, is typical. The
words do not tell us what it means, but the context usually helps.
Think of multi-word expressions as units, just like single words; always record the whole expression
in your notebook, along with information on grammar and collocation, e.g. This tin opener has seen
better days. [it is rather old and broken down; usually of things, always perfect tense form]
Multi-word expressions of this type are often rather informal and include a personal comment on
the situation. They are sometimes humorous or ironic. As with any informal words, be careful how
you use them. Never use them just to sound ‘fluent’or ‘good at English’. In a formal situation with a
person you do not know, don’tsay:
‘How do you do, Mrs Watson? Do take the weight off your feet.’[sit down]
Instead say: ‘Dosit down’or ‘Have a seat.’
Organising multi-word expressionsB
Multi-word expressions can be grouped in a variety of ways. It is probably best to use whichever way
you find most useful to help you remember them.
Grouping by grammar
get (hold of) the wrong end of the stick [misunderstand]
pull a fast one [trick/deceive someone] verb + object
poke your nose in(to) [interfere]
be over the moon [extremely happy/elated]
feel down in the dumps [depressed/low] verb + prepositional phrase
be in the red [have a negative bank balance]
Grouping by meaning, e.g. expressions describing people’s character/intellect
He’s as daft as a brush. [very stupid/silly]
She takes the biscuit. /ˈbɪskɪt/[is the extreme / the worst of all]
They’re a pain in the neck. [a nuisance / a difficult person]
Little Sam’s as good as gold. [behaves very well - usually used about children]
Grouping by a verb or other key word, e.g. expressions with make
Why do you have to make a meal out of everything? [exaggerate the importance of everything]
I think we should make a move. It’s gone ten o’clock. [go/leave]
Most politicians are on the make. I don’ttrust any of them.
[wanting money/power for oneself]
I’m afraid I’m making heavy weather of my essay. [making slow and difficult progress]
Grammar of multi-word expressionsC
It is important when using these expressions to know just how flexible their grammar is. Some are
more fixed than others. For instance, barking up the wrong tree [be mistaken] is always used in
continuous, not simple form, e.g. I think you’re barking up the wrong tree.
(NOT I think you bark up the wrong tree.)
A good dictionary may help, but it is best to observe the grammar in real examples.
Note how Units 89-94 group expressions in different ways.
For more information on multi-word expressions, see English Idioms in Use by
Michael McCarthy and Felicity O’Dell.
164 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
79.1 Complete the expressions from A and B opposite.
the moon1 When I passed all my exams, I felt over .
2 This printer isn’tworking again! It’s a pain .
3 It’s almost midnight! I’d better be making .
4 I spent too much money last month and now I’m in .
5 It’s time to change my laptop. It’s five years old and has seen .
6 She is the absolute limit! She really takes .
7 Oh dear, Matthew completely misunderstood me. He always seemsto get .
8 I’m sorry. I do some really stupid things. You must think I’m as daft .
9 I wonder what’s wrong with Ursula? She looks down .
10 I don’ttrust politicians. Most of them are just on the .
79.2 Which expressions from the opposite page do these pictures remind you of?
1 be over the moon 3
2 4
79.3 Which is correct, (a) or (b)? Check with A and B opposite.
b1 Sit down and (a) get (b) take the weight off your feet.
2 Why does she always have to (a) poke (b) peek her nose into other people’s affairs?
3 I was feeling (a) under (b) below the weather, so I didn’tgo to work.
4 Zoe pulled a (a) quick (b) fast one and didn’tpay for her share of the meal.
5 All right, all right! You don’thave to (a) cook (b) make a meal out of it!
6 He’s really making (a) heavy (b) bad weather of what should be a simple task.
79.4 Without using a dictionary, try to work out the meaning of the underlined expressions
from the context.
1 It’s midnight. It’s time to hit the sack. go to bed
2 This is just kid’s stuff. I want something more difficult and challenging!
3 I feel fit as a fiddle ever since I started going regularly to the gym.
4 I can’tunderstand why he’s giving me the cold shoulder. He’s usually so friendly.
5 I haven’tseen Simone for ages. We only get together once in a blue moon.
6 I think I’ve got the hang of this photo-editing program now, though it was complicated at first.
79.5 Over to you
Try a grouping exercise with six expressions from the opposite page, using any of the methods
suggested in B. Which type of grouping works best for the expressions you chose?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 165
