Prefixes71
A Negative prefixes on adjectives
Prefixes are often used to give adjectives a negative or an opposite meaning. For example, fair/unfair,
experienced/inexperienced and similar/dissimilar are opposites. Other examples are ‘unnatural’,
‘inedible’, ‘disorganised’. Unfortunately, there is no easy way of knowing which prefix any adjective
will use to form its opposite.
in- becomes im- before a root beginning with ‘m’or ‘p’, e.g. immature, impatient, immoral,
impossible, improbable. Similarly in- becomes ir- before a word beginning with ‘r’, e.g. irregular,
irresponsible, irreplaceable, and il- before a word beginning with ‘l’, e.g. illegal, illegible, illiterate.
Language help
The prefix in- (and its variations) does not always have a negative meaning - often it gives the idea
of inside or into, e.g. internal, import, insert, income.
B Negative prefixes on verbs
The prefixes un- and dis- can also form the opposites of verbs, e.g. tie/untie, appear/disappear.
These prefixes are used to reverse the action of the verb. Here are some more examples: disagree,
disapprove, disbelieve, disconnect, discourage, dislike, disprove, disqualify, unbend, undo, undress,
unfold, unload, unlock, unveil, unwrap, unzip.
C Other common prefixes
Some words with prefixes use a hyphen. Check in a dictionary if you’re not sure.
prefix meaning examples
anti against anti-war antisocial antibiotic antiseptic
auto of or by oneself autograph auto-pilot autobiography
bi two/twice bicycle bilateral biannual bilingual
ex former ex-wife ex-smoker ex-boss
ex out of extract exhale excommunicate
micro small microbiology microchip microscopic microwave
mis badly/wrongly misunderstand mistranslate mislead
mono one/single monolingual monologue monogamous
multi many multinational multimedia multi-purpose
over too much overdo overtired oversleep overeat
post after post-war postgraduate post-impressionist
pre before preconceived pre-war pre-judge
pro in favour of pro-government pro-revolutionary
pseudo false pseudo-scientific pseudo-intellectual
re again/back rewrite regain rearrange repay replace renew
semi half semi-circular semi-final semi-detached
sub under subway submarine subdivision
under not enough underworked underused undercooked
148 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
71.1 Which negative adjective fits each of the following definitions?
unfair1 means not being fair or right
2 means impossible to eat.
3 means unable to read or write.
4 means not being well organised.
5 means not having much sense of responsibility.
6 means unable to be replaced.
71.2 Use the word in brackets to complete the sentences. Add the necessary prefix and put the
word in the correct form.
disqualified1 The runner was after a blood test. (qualify)
2 Children (and adults) love parcels at Christmas time. (wrap)
3 I almost always find that I with his opinion. (agree)
4 I’m sure he’s lying but it’s going to be hard to his story. (prove)
5 After a brief speech the President the new statue. (veil)
6 It took the removal men an hour our things from the van. (load)
7 His phone was because he didn’tpay his last bill. (connect)
8 Hannah the letter and began to read it. (fold)
71.3 Answer the following questions with words from the table opposite.
microwave1 What kind of oven cooks things particularly fast?
2 How can you describe a cream, for example, that helps prevent infection?
3 What kind of company has branches in many countries?
4 How are aeroplanes often flown for easy stretches of a flight? on
5 What is a student who is studying for a second degree?
6 What word means ‘underground railway’in the US and ‘underground passage’in
the UK?
71.4 Write the opposites of the words underlined. Not all the words you need are on the
opposite page. Use a dictionary to help you.
dishonest1 He’s a very honest man. 7 She’s employed.
2 I’m sure she’s discreet. 8 He’s very efficient.
3 I always find him very sensitive. 9 The door is locked.
4 It’s a convincing argument. 10 He seems grateful for our help.
5 That’s a very relevant point. 11 I’m sure she’s loyal to the firm.
6 She’s always obedient. 12 He’s a tolerant person.
71.5 Using the table opposite, construct words or phrases to replace the underlined words.
pro-American1 He’s in favour of the American approach.
2 The BBC tries to avoid pronouncing foreign words incorrectly.
3 Most people say they have to work too hard but are paid too little.
4 Dan says that economics is not really a science even if it claims to be one.
5 She’s still on good terms with the man who used to be her husband.
6 He made a mistake in the calculation and had to do it again.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 149
