Belief and opinion42
Verbs connected with beliefs and opinionsA
You probably already know think and believe; here are some more verbs.
I’m convinced we’ve met before. [very strong feeling that you’re right]
I’ve always held that compulsory education is a waste of time. [used for very firm beliefs; fml; maintain
could be used here]
She maintains that we’re related, but I’m not convinced. [insists on believing, often against the evidence;
fml; hold could not be used here]
I feel she shouldn’tbe forced to do the job. [strong personal opinion]
I reckon they’llget married soon. [used for an opinion about what is likely to happen / to be true; infml]
I doubt /daʊt/ we’llever see total world peace. [don’tbelieve]
I suspect a lot of people never even think about pollution when they’re driving their own car. [have a
strong feeling about something negative; fairly formal]
B Phrases for expressing opinion
We haven’tmade any progress, in my view / in my opinion. (fairly formal)
She’s made a big mistake, to my mind. (fairly informal)
If you ask me, he ought to change his job. (infml)
Note how point of view is used in English:
From a teacher’s point of view, the new examinations are a disaster. [how teachers see things, or are
affected]
Common mistakes
Notice the prepositions in these phrases: In my opinion/view but to my mind and from my point
of view. (NOT in my mind or in my point of view)
Prepositions used with belief and opinion wordsC
Do you believe in life after death? What are your views on divorce? What do you think of the new
boss?
Are you for or against long prison sentences? (neutral/infml)
I’m in favour of (opp opposed to; fml) long prison sentences.
I have my doubts about this plan.
Beliefs, ideologies, philosophies, convictionsD
If you would rather organise this word tree differently or can add more examples, do so; it will
probably help you to remember the words better.
beliefs
convictionsideologies philosophies
lef/right wing religious moralintellectual personal
socialist conservative Darwinist vegetarian Muslim pacifist
E Adjectives for describing beliefs and opinions
These are in sets which have similar, but not exactly the same, meaning:
fanatical / obsessive eccentric / odd / weird conservative / traditional
middle-of-the-road / moderate dedicated / committed firm / strong radical / extreme
Jason is a fanatical supporter of the Green Party. Grandpa has rather eccentric views. Maria is a moderate
liberal. Rosie is a committed Christian. Emma is a firm believer in free speech. Tom is a radical Marxist.
90 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
42.1 Match the sentence beginnings on the left with the endings on the right and add an
appropriate preposition. Sometimes more than one answer is possible.
1 I have strong views on c a my opinion.
2 Many people believe b the proposed changes.
3 I was in favour c marriage.
4 What does she think d the plans for the new airport?
5 This is absurd, e life after death.
6 He’s quite wrong, f how honest he is.
7 Well, that’s just silly, g our point of view.
8 I have my doubts h the new teacher?
9 Is Alex likely to be opposed i my mind.
42.2 Use adjectives from E which fit the phrases describing the beliefs and views of
these people.
1 A person who insists that the earth is flat. (an eccentric belief)
2 A person who believes absolutely in the power of love to solve world problems.
(a believer in the power of love)
3 A socialist neither on the left or the right of the party. (a socialist)
4 A vegetarian who refuses even to be in the same room as people who love meat. (an
vegetarian)
5 Someone who is always suspicious of change. (a rather view of the world)
6 Someone who is in favour of making everyone wear blue clothes on Tuesdays. (a rather
point of view)
42.3 Rewrite these sentences using a form of the verb in brackets.
My mum reckons Nina's expecting a baby.1 My mum’s sure Nina’s expecting a baby. (reckon)
2 I’ve always suspected that ghosts don’treally exist. (doubt)
3 My view has always been that people should rely on themselves more. (hold)
4 Claudia is convinced that the teacher has been unfair to her. (maintain)
5 I had a very strong feeling that I had been in that room before. (convince)
6 In his view, we should have tried again. (feel)
42.4 Over to you
Are you ... ? Consider ho w many of these words apply to you, and explain why. Some ideas for
situations are given in the box to help you decide. Write sentences about yourself.
EXAMPLE I don't think I'm a moralist because I wouldn't try to impose my views about religious or other
morality on other people.
a moralist left-wing an intellectual a traditionalist a philosopher middle-of-the-road
a radical thinker dedicated
food preferences politics learning English sport life and existence
work religion
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 91
