Distances and dimensions54
A Broad and wide and tall and high
Wide is more common than broad, e.g. It’s a very wide road/garden/room.
Make a note of typical collocations for broad as you meet them, e.g. Economics is a very broad
subject. We came to a broad expanse of grassland. [big area]
Note the word order for dimensions, e.g. The room’s five metres long and four wide.
Don’tforget that tall is for people but can be used for things such as buildings and trees when they
are high and thin in some way. Otherwise, use high for things.
She’s very tall for a five-year-old.
Her office is in that tall building in the square.
There are some high mountains in the North.
B Deep ≠ shallow
The deep and shallow ends of a swimming pool.
Derived words, phrases and compoundsC
long Let’s measure the length /leŋθ/ of this rope.
I swam 20 lengths (of the swimming pool).
I’ve lengthened her skirt for her. [opp = shorten, see below]
Getting a visa can be a lengthy process. (usually refers to time; rather negative)
Tony has got a job as a long-distance lorry driver.
short The new road will shorten our journey by ten minutes.
There’s a shortcut to the station. [quick way]
wide Let’s measure the width /wɪdθ/of the room.
They’re widening the road.
broad I want to broaden my experience. (usually more abstract contexts)
She’s very broad-minded and tolerant of others. [willing to accept other people’s behaviour and
beliefs; opp = narrow-minded]
I admire the breadth of his knowledge. (usually more abstract concepts)
high The height /haɪt/of the wall is two metres.
The fog heightened the feeling of mystery. (usually used only for feelings and emotions)
low You can lower the microphone if it’s too high. [opp = raise]
far He loves travelling to faraway places. [a long way away = distant]
distant What’s the distance from Helsinki to St Petersburg? [= How far is it ...? ]
deep The depth of the river here is about three metres.
His death so soon after hers deepened our sadness. (often with feelings)
Other verbs for dimensions and for changing themD
Our garden stretches all the way to the river, so we have plenty of room to extend the house if we
want to.
The cities are spreading and the countryside is shrinking. [getting bigger; getting smaller]
The business expanded considerably in the last decade. [grew in size; opp = contract]
114 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
54.1 Complete B’s replies using a suitable form of the dimension/distance words opposite and
any other necessary words.
1 A: These trousers I’ve bought are too long.
them shortened?B: Well, why don’tyou get
2 A: He’s a big boy, isn’the? 1.90 metres!
B: Yes, he’s .
3 A: Why are we going across the field?
B: Just to get there a bit quicker; it’s .
4 A: We’llhave to measure how high the room is.
B: That’s not necessary; we already know the .
5 A: The traffic seems to move far quicker on this road since I was last here.
B: Yes, well, they .
6 A: Why do they have music on TV news programmes? It seems totally unnecessary!
B: Well, I think they want to create a feeling of drama, and the music
is supposed to .
54.2 Give opposites for:
1 a length of the pool a width of the pool 4 a local call 7 narrow-minded
2 to shorten 5 deep water 8 raise your hand
3 a very broad range of goods 6 nearby places
54.3 Match the sentence beginnings on the left with the endings on the right.
c1 The city’s spread a lot; a for miles along the river.
2 It takes ten weeks; b you should broaden it.
3 We extended the house c it’s much bigger now.
4 You can choose; d there’s a wide range.
5 Your experience is too narrow; e it’s a lengthy business.
6 The forest stretches f to give us more room.
Use the verbs in the box to fill the gaps.54.4
spread expand extend stretch shrink contract
1 I’ll spread the rug out on the grass so we can both sit on it.
2 The steel industry when the economy was strong, but now it has and
only employs 8,000 people.
3 This sweater of mine has in the wash!
4 Our land as far as those trees there.
5 The arts centre has recently its opening hours.
54.5 Fill in the prepositions. If you are unsure, try looking up the word distance in a dictionary.
at1 The car was parked a distance about 150 metres from the scene of the robbery.
2 I saw you the distance yesterday but didn’tcall out as you were with someone.
3 She’s a great shot. She can hit an empty can a distance of about 100 feet.
4 What’s the total distance here Paris?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 115
