Pleasant and unpleasant feelings43
A Happiness and unhappiness
You feel ...
content(ed) when you are satisfied with what you have. Content is not used before a noun. You can
say ‘She is content/contented’but only ‘a contented person’.
He’s very content with his life. He’s always been a contented person.
grateful when someone has done something thoughtful for you. Note: You feel thankful if something
bad that could have happened did not happen.
I’m really grateful to you for helping me with my project.
delighted when something has happened that gives you great pleasure, when you hear news of
someone’s good fortune, for instance.
I was delighted to hear you’re getting married!
miserable when everything seems wrong in your life.
I felt miserable all day yesterday - maybe it was just the grey, cold weather.
discontented when your life is not giving you satisfaction.
She’s very discontented with her job and is going to look for a new one.
fed up / sick and tired when you have had enough of something disagreeable.
I’m fed up with Olivia's rudeness, and sick (and tired) of her bad behaviour.
depressed when you are miserable over a long period of time. Depression is considered an illness in
some severe cases.
I felt depressed after having ten job interviews and not getting a job.
confused when you cannot make sense of different conflicting feelings or ideas.
I feel so confused - last week she said she loved me passionately; this week she said
we were just good friends.
B Excitement, upset, anger and anxiety
I felt inspired after the concert. I’ve decided She was so thrilled when she got a job with
to take piano lessons. a TV company. She’s always wanted to work
[stimulated to do something positive or creative] in the media.
[how you feel when something extremely
exciting and pleasing happens]
The argument I had with Eva the other
night really upset me.
[made me feel unhappy] I was so nervous before the exam, and
then I felt anxious before the results came
out, but I passed with a high grade.
I was quite enthusiastic about my tennis [nervous: feeling nervous is a bit like feeling
lessons at first, but the teacher isn’tvery excited but it is a negative feeling]
good and now I just feel frustrated. [anxious: when you are afraid and uncertain]
[enthusiastic: had very positive feelings]
[frustrated: feeling unable to do something
I was furious with the waiter. The serviceyou really want to do]
was slow and he spilt coffee over my shirt.
[extremely angry]
Language help
Really can be used with all the adjectives on this page. Absolutely goes only with the words describing
extreme states, i.e. delighted, fed up, sick and tired, thrilled, furious. With these words quite means
absolutely, but with the other less extreme words, quite means rather.
92 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
43.1 Read the remarks and then answer the questions.
Pilar ‘Ifelt so good Max ‘I’ve hadKatie ‘IlikeGeorge ‘I’m just not that nothing bad enough of all themy life and Ifeeling very happy had happened. It arguments and thehave nothing totoday. Everything could have been a bad atmosphere atcomplain about.’seems to have gone disaster.’ work.’
wrong.’
Carlos ‘I’veSara ‘Thank Stefan ‘IjustAgnes ‘Ifelt very been so unhappyyou for helping don’tunderstand.happy when I heard for a long time.me today.’ Was that his wifeshe had an interview I’ve been seeing or his daughter?’for the job.’ a psychiatrist.’
Who feels ... name Who feels ... name
1 fed up with something? 5 miserable?Max
2 depressed? 6 thankful?
3 content? 7 confused?
4 grateful? 8 delighted?
43.2 Rewrite the words in bold using words from A and B opposite.
1 After watching the nature programme, I felt stimulated inspired to become a zoologist.
2 I always get a feeling of negative excitement just before an exam.
3 I was extremely angry when they refused to give me my money back.
4 I was very excited and pleased to see my old school friend again after so long.
5 The news about Rory’s illness really made me feel unhappy
6 At first, I was full of positive feelings about the course, but it’s just not very good.
43.3 Sort the adjectives into positive and negative feelings.
contented sick and tired anxious thrilled frustrated confused
positive negative
sick and tired
43.4 Fill the gaps using the adjectives in 43.3. Choose an appropriate adverb (absolutely, quite
or a bit) to go in front of the adjective. Sometimes, both are possible.
quite anxious1 I was feeling (quite / absolutely) because she had not phoned to say she
had arrived safely.
2 I am (quite / absolutely) of her selfish behaviour. I’ve had enough!
3 It’s all so complicated. I feel (a bit / quite) . Can you help me?
4 I was (absolutely / a bit) when I heard the wonderful news!
5 It made me feel (quite / a bit) that I still couldn’tplay any songs after six
weeks of guitar lessons.
6 You always seem so (absolutely / quite) with life. How lucky you are!
43.5 Over to you
Choose six adjectives from this unit which describe feelings you have had recently and write
sentences about when and why you felt that way.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 93
