Collective nouns87
A People
Collective nouns are used to describe a group of the same people or things.
a group of people a crowd of people a gang of thieves
(smaller number) (large number) (rather negative)
B Words associated with certain animals
A flock of sheep or birds, e.g. geese/pigeons; a herd of cows, deer, goats; a shoal of fish
(or any particular fish, e.g. a shoal of herring/mackerel - note the use of singular here); a swarm
/swO:m/ of insects (typically flying ones, e.g. a swarm of bees/gnats).
A pack of ... can be used for dogs, hyenas, wolves, etc. as well as for (playing) cards.
People involved in the same job/activityC
These nouns are used with singular or plural verbs, depending on your point of view.
A team of reporters/rescue workers was/were at the scene of the disaster.
The crew was/were saved when the ship sank. [workers on a ship/ambulance/plane]
The company is/are rehearsing a new production. [group of actors]
The cast is/are all amateurs. [actors in a film or theatre production]
The public has/have a right to know the truth. [the people as a whole]
The staff are on strike. (normally used with a plural verb; general word for groups who share a place of work,
e.g. teachers in a school, people in an office)
D Physical features of landscapes
In the picture we can see a row of cottages near a clump of trees with a range of hills in the
background. Out on the lake there is a small group of islands.
E Things in general
a pair of birds sitting on a branch [two of anything that are
the same]
a couple of strawberries [vague way of saying two, not necessarily
exactly the same]
a pile/heap of papers (or clothes, dishes, toys, etc.)
a bunch of flowers (or grapes, bananas, etc.)
a stack of chairs (or tables, boxes, logs, etc.)
a set of tools (or pots and pans, dishes, etc.)
180 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
87.1 Fill each gap with a suitable collective noun.
swarms1 There are of mosquitoes in the forests in Scandinavia in the summer.
2 As we looked into the water, we saw a of brightly coloured fish.
3 There was a of youths on the corner; they didn’tlook very friendly.
4 There’s a of cards on the bookshelf. Will you fetch them for me, please?
5 A of biologists is studying marine life in this area.
6 Look at that of birds on that tree. Both of them have beautiful markings. I wonder what
they are?
7 Could you put a of spoons of sugar in this coffee for me, please? It’s very bitter. Yes, just
two, that’s fine. Thanks.
87.2 In each case, one of the examples is wrong. Which one? Put a line through it.
1 Company is often used for actors / swimmers / opera singers.
2 Cast is often used for people in a play / a book / a film.
3 Crew is often used for the staff of an ambulance / a plane / a hospital.
4 Pack is often used for cats / dogs / wolves.
5 Flock is often used for sheep / pigeons / pigs.
6 Herd is often used for cows / fish / goats.
87.3 Match the collective nouns on the left with the words on the right.
1 a clump of c a houses
2 a range of b flies
3 a gang of c fir trees
4 a swarm of d deer
5 a row of e grapes
6 a heap of f mountains
7 a herd of g criminals
8 a bunch of h bed linen
87.4 Rewrite these sentences using collective nouns. Don’t forget to change the verb to
singular or plural where necessary.
1 There are some tables on top of one another in the next room.
There is a stack of tables in the next room.
2 There are a large number of people waiting outside.
3 The people who work there are very well paid.
4 A large number of sheep had escaped from a field.
5 She gave me six identical glasses.
6 She gave me five or six beautiful roses.
87.5 Some collective nouns are associated with words about using language. Underline any
you can see in this text, check their meanings in a dictionary and make a note of them in
your vocabulary notebook.
THE journalists raised a host of difficult questions about the actions of the police during the
demonstration. There had been a barrage of complaints about police violence. The Chief of Police
replied that he was not prepared to listen to a string of wild accusations without any evidence.
In the end, he just gave a series of short answers that left everyone dissatisfied.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 181
