24 Environmental problems
A The problems and their causes
A variety of environmental problems now affect our entire world. As globalisation1 continues,
localissues becomeinternational ones,so today there arefewplaces intheworld thatdonot suffer
from environmental problems. Some of the major problems now affecting the world are acid
rain2, air pollution3, global warming4, hazardous5 waste, ozone depletion6, smog7, water
pollution, overpopulation, and rainforest destruction8. People are also worried about the
greenhouse effect, where an increase in the amount of carbon dioxide [CO2] and other gases9
in the Earth’s atmosphere10 causes a gradual warming of the surface of the Earth. This global
warming is leading to the thawing of the polar ice caps11 and all this is causing concern
about climate change. Both human behaviour and climate change have led to many animal
and plant species12 becoming endangered13 or even extinct14.
1 increasing business, cultural and other contacts between countries 2 rain which contains harmful chemicals
as a result of burning substances such as oil and coal [acid = a type of liquid that reacts chemically with other
materials, sometimes dissolving them] 3 damage caused to the air by harmful substances or waste
4 rise in the world’s temperature 5 dangerous 6 reduction in the ozone layer [layer of air above the Earth
containing ozone which prevents harmful ultraviolet light from the sun from reaching Earth]
7 air pollution found in cities caused by a mixture of smoke, gases and chemicals (the word has been formed
8 destroying (cutting down) forest in a tropical area which receives a lot of rainfrom smoke + fog)
9 substance in a form that is neither solid nor liquid 10 the mixture of gases around the Earth
11 ice covering the areas at the North and South Poles 12 types 13 very few in number, at risk of
14 not existing any longerbecoming extinct
Language help
The prefix over- means too much. Overfishing means that people have fished so much that it is
having a serious effect on fish populations. Overpopulated means there are so many people
living in an area that life is difficult there.
B Dealing with the problems
Worldwide efforts are being made to improve the situation. Green parties and green or ecological
policies are mainly concerned with protecting the environment. Conservation organisations are
developing nature reserves where plants and animals are protected. Some farmers produce organic
food, which avoids the use of harmful chemicals. More companies try to behave in a way that is
environmentally friendly or ecologically sound. Societies attempt to dispose of waste in a more
responsible way, by, for example, recycling as much as possible. People aim to reduce their carbon
footprint by using cars less so that they cut down on their use of fossil fuels, for example.
Word familiesC
noun verb adjective adverb
globalisation globalise global globally
environment, environmentalist environmental environmentally
pollution, pollutant pollute polluting
destruction destroy destructive destructively
disposal dispose disposable
reduction reduce reduced
54 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
24.1 Answer each question, using a word or expression from the box.
acid rain carbon dioxide endangered species extinct global warming
globalisation hazardous waste ozone layer polar ice caps destruction of rainforests
smog water pollution
1 What happened to dinosaurs about 65 million years ago? They became extinct.
2 What is the name for a special layer in the Earth’s atmosphere which helps protect our planet?
3 What word can be used to describe the increasing contact between countries that has a major
impact on life today?
4 What causes problems because it is difficult to dispose of safely?
5 What have scientists shown to be melting worryingly fast at the North and South Poles?
6 What does the chemical symbol CO2 represent?
7 What has been happening in the Amazon area and in other tropical areas like Indonesia and
Malaysia?
8 What problem is a type of air pollution?
9 What can cause harm to plant or other life when it falls on the land or sea?
10 What is the Siberian tiger an example of?
11 What has caused much plant and animal life in rivers in industrial areas to die out?
12 What is the term for the phenomenon describing the rise in the Earth’s average temperature?
24.2 Match words to form compound nouns.
acid rain1 acid fuel 6 greenhouse disposal
2 carbon change 7 nature reserve
3 climate party 8 organic depletion
4 fossil footprint 9 ozone effect
5 green rain 10 waste food
24.3 Choose a word from the opposite page to complete each sentence.
environmentalist1 An is a person who does what they can to help protect the environment.
2 items like plastic cups and paper plates are labour-saving but have a harmful effect on
the environment.
3 The government says it is aiming for a significant in this country’s use of fossil fuels over
the next ten years.
4 The company plans to part of a nature reserve in order to build its new warehouses.
5 Carbon monoxide (CO) is an example of an air .
6 The melting of the polar ice caps will have a impact on the environment.
7 Staff can of all recyclable items in these green bins.
8 Air pollution may the lives of people with respiratory illnesses.
9 This company is proud of its friendly policies.
24.4 Over to you
Answer these questions.
1 Which of the environmental problems in A exist in your country?
2 Do you think climate change is having any impact in your country?
3 How much support do green parties have in your country?
4 What could power cars instead of petrol or diesel?
5 Suggest three things people can do to reduce their carbon footprint.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 55
