Success, failure and difficulty60
A Succeeding
We succeeded in persuading a lot of people to join our protest. (in + -ing)
I managed to contact him just before he left his office.
I don’tthink I can manage the whole walk. I think I’llturn back. (manage, but not
succeed; may have a direct object in this meaning)
We’ve achieved /@'tSi:vd/ / accomplished /əˈkɒmplɪʃt/a great deal in the last year.
(both are used with quantity phrases such as ‘a lot’and ‘a little’;accomplish is rather formal)
The company has achieved all its goals/aims/targets for this year. (achieve is more common than
accomplish with nouns expressing goals and ambitions)
Do you think his plan will come off? [succeed; infml]
Here is a matrix for some typical collocations with ‘succeeding’verbs:
reach attain secure realise fulfil achieve
an ambition ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
a dream ✓ ✓
an agreement ✓ ✓
an obligation ✓ ✓
a target ✓ ✓ ✓
a compromise ✓
B Failing and difficulty
Plans and projects sometimes go wrong / backfire. [don’tgo as intended]
Companies, clubs and societies often fold / go under through lack of success. [close down; go under is
informal]
A plan or project may falter /ˈfɒltə/, even if it finally succeeds. [have ups and downs]
All your plans and hard work / efforts may come to nothing.
I have great difficulty (in) getting up in the morning.
I find it difficult to remember the names of everybody in the class. (hard can also be used here;
it is more informal)
It’s hard/difficult to hear what she’s saying.
I often have trouble starting the car on cold mornings. (more informal)
We’ve had a lot of bother with the neighbours lately. (very informal)
Can you cope with three more students? They’ve just arrived. [deal successfully with a difficult situation]
I’ve got no money and my girlfriend’s left me. I need help; I can’tcope any more.
C Word formation
verb noun adjective adverb
succeed success successful successfully
accomplish accomplishment accomplished -
achieve achievement achievable -
attain attainment attainable -
fulfil fulfilment fulfilling -
harden hardness hard hard
Common mistakes
Izzy had great difficulty finding somewhere to live in London. (NOT difficulties)
Paul had considerable success with his first novel. (NOT successes)
126 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
60.1 Choose a suitable verb to fill the gaps. If the exact word in the sentence is not in the
vertical column of the matrix on the opposite page, look for something that is close in
meaning. More than one verb is often possible.
reached1 The management have a no-strike agreement with the union.
2 Now I’ve all my family responsibilities, I can retire and travel the world.
3 The school building fund has failed to its target of £250,000.
4 I never thought I would my ambition, but now I have.
5 Very few people all their hopes and dreams in life.
6 We hope the two sides a compromise and avoid war.
7 I’m afraid that little plan of mine didn’t off.
60.2 Fill in the missing word forms where they exist.
verb noun adjective
realise realisation
difficulty
target
fail
trouble
Correct the mistakes in these sentences.60.3 it1 I find very difficult to understand English idioms.
2 She succeeded to rise to the top of her profession.
3 Do you ever have any trouble to use this photocopier? I always seem to.
4 I’ve accomplished to work quite hard this last month.
5 I’m amazed that you can cope all the work they give you.
6 Did you have many difficulties finding the book in the library?
7 Unfortunately, it seems as if all Johnny’s plans have come at nothing.
8 I’m afraid I haven’thad any successes in contacting Lara today.
60.4 In what sorts of situations would you hear the following remarks?
1 We’llhave to get an au 2 I can’tbelieve it — £5,000. 3 It went under, I’m
pair. I just can’tcope. The company folded and now afraid, and he’s
I’ve got nothing to show for it! bankrupt now.
You would probably hear it
from a parent who is finding
it too difficult to combine work
and family life.
5 Yes, her plan came off
4 You can’tmanage all even though the odds
that. Let me help you. were really against her.
60.5 Over to you
What would you do if ...
1 you were having a lot of bother with your car?
2 you started a small business but it came to nothing?
3 you couldn’t cope with your English studies?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 127
