Speaking45
A Reporting verbs
We can use these verbs to report people’s speech and how they speak (including how loudly and what
their mood is).
verb loudness most likely mood
whisper very soft telling someone a secret*
murmur soft romantic or complaining
mumble soft (and unclear) nervous or insecure
mutter soft irritated
shout loud angry or excited
scream loud (usually without words) frightened or excited
shriek loud (and shrill) frightened or amused
stutter, stammer neutral nervous or excited**
*People also whisper in places where it would be impolite to speak loudly.
**Stuttering and stammering may also be the result of a speech impediment.
‘I’m sick of this. I’m going home,’he muttered.
Suddenly, someone shouted ‘Help!’
She whispered that she was not happy with the way the meeting was going.
B Describing feelings
These verbs indicate the speaker’s feelings or intentions. (sb = someone, sth = something)
verb patterns feeling verb patterns feeling
boast to sb about sth proud of yourself complain to sb about sth displeased
insist on sth determined maintain that confident
unhappy with a
object to + -ing situation confess to + -ing repentant
threaten to do sth aggressive urge sb to do sth encouraging
argue with sb about sth not in agreement beg sb to do sth desperate
groan that despair, pain grumble about sth displeased
C Adverbs related to speech
To indicate someone’s feelings, you can use a speaking verb plus an adverb. For example,
‘Hesaid anxiously.’‘She spoke angrily.’This is common in written style.
If someone feels angry: angrily furiously bitterly
If someone feels unhappy: gloomily miserably sadly
If someone feels happy: happily cheerfully gladly hopefully
If someone feels worried: anxiously nervously desperately
Other useful adverbs: excitedly, impatiently, reluctantly, shyly.
Language help
Most of the verbs in B above can also be used with a that clause.
She boasted that she had scored 20 goals in one season.
He threatened (that) he would call the police.
96 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
45.1 Choose a verb from A opposite to fit the meaning of the sentences.
1 ‘Oh,noooooooooo!!!!!!’she screamed / shrieked in absolute terror.
2 ‘Don’tlook now, but Matt has just arrived,’she in my ear.
3 ‘Joey! Come here at once!!’his mother .
4 ‘Id-d-d-did it,’he .
5 ‘I’m sick of this meeting. I’m going home,’he .
6 ‘Oh,that’s so, so funny!’she with laughter.
7 ‘There’s a spider!!!’she .
8 ‘Stop ! I can’thear what you’re saying,’she said.
9 ‘Ithink we should leave now. It’s late,’he quietly.
45.2 Match the sentence beginnings on the left with the endings on the right.
1 He always maintained a to cancel my parking permit.d
2 He groaned b not to leave, but I had to.
3 They threatened c on using recycled paper for everything.
4 She complained d that he could read people’s minds.
5 He begged me e that he needed a doctor immediately.
6 She insisted f about the noise coming from above.
45.3 Add a reporting verb and one of the adverbs from the box to each sentence. Where possible,
use reporting verbs from A.
angrily bitterly impatiently happily hopefully anxiously sadly excitedly
Milly ‘You must pay Andrew ‘Ifeel Leo ‘Iwill neverPetra ‘Ohwow!attention!’ much better forgive them forI’ve just won a prizeMilly shouted angrily. today, thank what they did.’in a competition!’you.’
Lily ‘Thisis our Anna ‘We mayKallum ‘Oh,Rory ‘I’m verylast day together. be lucky and thecome on! Doworried. She said sheI’llmiss you.’ rain might stop.’hurry up! Let’swould phone us.’ go! Now!’
45.4 Rewrite the sentences using the verbs in brackets.
1 Don’texaggerate your talents to your friends. They’llstop liking you. (boast)
Don't boast about your talents to your friends.
2 I’m not happy with having to sit on the floor. I paid for a seat. (object)
3 Stop being discontented with your job all the time. (grumble)
4 He talked about refusing to pay and calling the police. (threaten)
5 She asked if we would help her. (beg)
6 He admitted that he had broken the window. (confess) (two answers)
45.5 Answer the questions.
1 Which adverbs describe positive (P) feelings and which describe negative (N) feelings?
gloomily (N) miserably ( ) cheerfully ( ) desperately ( ) gladly ( )
2 Which prepositions usually follow: (a) object, (b) insist, (c) complain?
3 Which adverb means that someone does not want to do something?
4 What is the missing preposition? ‘Let’s be friends. I don’twant to argue you.’
5 How might someone speak at a job interview if they were not very confident?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 97
