Time: connecting words and expressions61
A One thing before another
I had written to her prior to meeting the committee. (formal/written style)
It was nice to be in Venice. Previously I’d only been to Rome. (fairly formal, more informal would be
Before that, I ... )
I was in the office from 2.30. I was out earlier on. [before then; fairly informal]
The street is now called Treetop Avenue. Formerly it was Hedge Lane. (fairly formal, typically written;
used when something has changed its name, state, etc.)
Dinner will be ready in about an hour. In the meantime / Meanwhile, relax and have a drink.
[between now and the time of the meal]
Things happening at the same timeB
She was entering (at) the very time / the very moment I was leaving. (these two are stronger and more
precise than as or just as)
The two events happened simultaneously. [started and ended at exactly the same time]
During the war, she lived in Dublin. Throughout the war, they remained in the city.
Language help
During does not specify how long within a period of time. Throughout means from the beginning
to the end of a period of time.
C One thing after another
Read this personal statement by someone hoping to work for an international corporation in China.
The words in bold are rather formal.
Following1 my first visit to Beijing, I read several books about China and subsequently2 decided
to take a six-month course in Mandarin Chinese. I revisited China on several occasions thereafter3
and now feel that I have a good knowledge of the country and its culture.
1 after 2 at some time after that 3 after finishing the course
Note also immediate (adjective), e.g. The government removed the price regulations and the
immediate result was a 10% price rise. [which happened at once]
D Time when
The moment / The minute I saw his face I knew I’d met him before.
I stayed in that hospital the time (that) I broke my leg.
I met Paula at Mark’s wedding. On that occasion she was with a different man. (more formal)
E Non-specific time expressions
We can discuss the budget now. At a later stage we can discuss the detailed arrangements.
At some point we will have to replace our computers, but we’re OK for the moment.
[at an unspecified time in the future]
128 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
61.1 Look at these pages from the personal diary of Laura, a businesswoman who travels a
lot, and then do the exercise.
Mon Paris – day 5 – Pompidou Centre Up early. Said goodbye to Nick and Fri
12 then theatre. left. Saw bad accident on motorway. 16
Tue Been away 6 days! Paris OK, but Answered all the emails, then felt Sat
13 miss home. I could watch TV! 17
Wed Left Paris 10 am. Huge pile of Lots of phone calls - Kate, Ellie Sun
14 emails waiting! and George all in a row! Lazy day! 18
Thu Manchester, then Glasgow. Met Book tickets for Dublin 24th Notes
15 Manuela at Nick’s.
Fill the gaps with time expressions from A and B opposite. You are given the first letter.
1 Prior to going to Manchester, Laura was in Paris.
2 Her next trip after Glasgow is to Dublin on the 24th. I t m ,
she can relax at home.
3 She was away for a week. S , she had lots of emails to deal with.
4 She was in Glasgow on the 15th. E o , she had been in Manchester.
5 She went to the theatre in Paris on Monday. P t that, she had been to the
Pompidou Centre.
6 F her visit to Nick, she saw a bad accident on the motorway.
7 On Sunday, she had a lot of phone calls d the day.
8 The m she put the phone down it rang again. This time it was George.
61.2 Rewrite the words in bold using words or phrases from opposite.
an immediate reply1 I emailed James and got a reply straight away.
2 I will contact you at a time I can’tspecify to arrange to get together to discuss things.
3 The two committees were meeting at exactly the same time.
4 I was living in Budapest when I was offered the job in Paris.
Read the comments and then answer the questions.61.3
Liba ‘IwasGunilla ‘Iwas in Edward ‘Iwas Kim ‘At the Josep ‘Ivisitedin Athens inOslo throughout in Athens for a very time I Hamburg; at aOctober, butthe summer. week, then in was in Rome, later stage I wentI didn’tseeJosep visited me Rome for two Edward was to Berlin.’Edward on thatduring that time.’ weeks thereafter.’ in Rome.’ occasion.’
Kim and Edward1 Which two people were in the same place at the same time?
2 Did Liba see Edward when she was in Athens? Yes/No
3 Did Gunilla spend part of the summer or all summer in Oslo?
4 Where did Josep go first – Berlin or Hamburg?
5 How many weeks in total did Edward spend in Athens and Rome?
6 Did Josep spend the whole summer in Oslo or probably just part of it?
61.4 Over to you
Complete the sentences so they are true for you.
1 The moment I wake up, I 3 I’m doing vocabulary right now. Earlier on, I was
2 Throughout my childhood I 4 Prior to going on holiday, I always
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 129
