Cause, reason, purpose and result63
A Cause and reason
You probably know how to use words like because, since and as to refer to the cause of or reason
for something. Here are some other ways to express cause and reason:
The collision was due to the icy conditions.
The collision was caused by ice on the road.
The cause of the collision was ice on the road.
The heavy rain caused the river to flood.
Owing to the icy conditions, the two cars collided.
Language help
If you use owing to with a clause, you must follow it with the fact that. In this example, the clause is
underlined. Owing to the fact that the conditions were icy, the two cars collided. (NOT Owing to the
conditions were icy, ...)
Here are some other ‘cause’words and typical contexts. They are all rather formal, and more suitable
for written use.
The rise in prices sparked (off) a lot of political protest. (often used for very strong, perhaps violent,
reactions to events)
The President’s statement gave rise to / provoked / generated a lot of criticism. (slightly less strong
than spark (off))
The new law has brought about / led to great changes in education. (often used for political/social
change)
This problem stems from the inflation of recent years. (explaining the direct origins of events and states)
The court case arose from / out of allegations made in a newspaper. (the allegations started the process
that led to the court case)
Reasons for and purposes of doing thingsB
Her reason for not going with us was that she had no money. or The reason (why) she didn’tgo with
us was that ... (less formal)
The following sentences are all fairly formal, and more frequent in written English:
I wonder what his motives were in sending that email? (purpose)
I wonder what prompted her to send that message? (reason/cause)
She wrote to the press with the aim of exposing the scandal. (purpose)
I’ve invited you here with a view to resolving our differences. (sounds a bit more indirect than with the
aim of)
He refused to answer on the grounds that his lawyer wasn’tthere. (reason)
The purpose of her visit was to inspect the equipment.
C Results
Most of these expressions are fairly formal, and more frequent in written English:
He did no work. As a result / As a consequence / Consequently, he failed his exams.
The result/consequence of all these changes is that no one is happy any more.
The examples with consequence/consequently sound more formal than result.
His remarks resulted in everyone getting angry. (verb + in)
The events had an outcome that no one could have predicted. [result of a process or events, or of
meetings, discussions, etc.]
The upshot of all these problems was that we had to start again. (less formal than outcome) When the
election results were announced, chaos ensued. (very formal)
132 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
63.1 Make two sentences into one using the ‘reason and purpose’ words in brackets. Look at B
opposite if you aren’t sure.
1 There was a controversial decision. She wrote to the local newspaper to protest. (prompt)
The controversial decision prompted her to write to the local newspaper to protest.
2 I didn’tcontact you. I’d lost your phone number. (reason)
3 I will not sign. This contract is illegal. (grounds)
4 The government passed a new law. It was in order to control prices. (aim)
5 She sent everyone flowers. I wonder why? (motives)
6 The salary was high. She applied for the job. (prompt)
63.2 Make full sentences using ‘cause and reason’ words from A opposite.
1 closure of 20 mines → strikes in coal industry
The closure of 20 mines sparked (off) strikes in the coal industry.
2 The announcement of higher taxes → a strong attack from the opposition
3 The new Act of Parliament → great changes in industry
4 The failure of the electrical system → the train crash
5 A violent storm → the wall collapsed
6 Food shortages → serious riots in several cities
7 The food shortages → bad economic policies
63.3 Fill in the missing prepositions.
1 My reasons for not joining the club are personal.
2 The purpose this pedal is to control the speed.
3 I came here the aim resolving our dispute.
4 His stupidity has resulted everyone having to do more work.
5 All this arose one small mistake we made.
6 It was done a view lowering inflation.
7 That press article has given rise a lot of criticism.
63.4 Use the pictures to describe the causes and results of events in different ways.
1 ... the road was blocked. There was heavy 2 ... everyone got a refund.
snow, which caused the road to be blocked.
3 ... the customers got angry. 4 ... we had to walk home.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 133
