Concession and contrast64
A Verbs of concession
Concession means accepting one part of an idea or fact, but putting another, more important
argument or fact against it.
It can be expressed with a conjunction, e.g. Although they were poor, they were independent, or an
adverb, e.g. He is a bit stupid. He’s very kind, nevertheless, or through verbs like those in the table
below.
example paraphrase and comments
I acknowledge/accept that he has worked I agree but ... ( accept is less formal than
hard but it isn’t enough. acknowledge)
I admit I was wrong, but I still think we I accept I’m guilty of what I’m accused of.
were right to doubt her.
I concede that you are right about the You have won this point in our argument.
goal, but not the method. (rather formal, used in debates/arguments)
Adverbs and other phrases showing contrastB
These examples are fairly informal:
OK, you’re sorry. That’s all well and good / That’s all very well, but how are you going to pay
us back?
You shouldn’tseem so surprised. After all, I did warn you.
It’s all very well saying you love dogs, but who will take it for
walks if we do get one?
He is boring, and he is rather cold and unfriendly,
but, for all that, he is your uncle and we should
invite him.
These examples are more formal:
Admittedly, she put a lot of effort in, but it was all wasted.
I thought she didn’tlike me. In fact, the reverse was true. We’re not almost there at all.In Europe they use metric measurements. In contrast, the USA Quite the opposite: we’ve gotstill uses many non-metric measurements. five miles to go yet.It’s not actually raining now. On the other hand, it may rain
later, so take the umbrella.
C Collocating phrases for contrast
When it comes to politics, Jamie and Isla are poles apart.
There’s a world of difference between being a friend and a lover.
There’s a great divide between city residents and people who live in the country.
A yawning gap divides the rich and poor in many countries.
There’s a huge discrepancy between his ideals and his actions.
Language help
On the other hand means ‘that is true and this is also true if we look at it from a different
viewpoint’, e.g. Life in the country is nice and quiet. On the other hand, you have to go a long way to
get to the shops. On the contrary is a rather formal expression which means ‘that is not true; the
opposite is true’, e.g. A: You must be pleased with your exam results. B: On the contrary, I thought
they would be much better.
134 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
64.1 Rewrite these sentences using the most likely verb from A opposite (there is usually more than
one possibility).
1 I know that you weren’tsolely to blame, but you must take some responsibility.
I accept that you weren't solely to blame but you must take some responsibility.
2 OK, OK, I was wrong, you were right; he is a nice guy.
3 The company is prepared to accept that you have suffered some delay, but we do not accept liability.
4 She didn’tdeny that we had done all we could, but she was still not content.
64.2 Complete the sentences with phrases from B opposite.
1 OK, you’ve cleaned the kitchen; 2 No need to panic. 3 She’s bossy and sly, but
that's all very well , but what , it ,
about the dining room? doesn’tstart till six. she is a friend.
5 I know you’ve been very busy
4 saying preparing for the school concert.
you’llpay me back soon; , but you still
when is what I want to know! mustn’tneglect your homework.
64.3 Use the word in brackets in an appropriate collocation to make comments on these statements.
1 Some people believe in nuclear weapons, some in world disarmament. (divide)
There's a great divide between those who believe in nuclear weapons, and those who believe in world disarmament.
2 She says one thing. She does quite the opposite. (discrepancy)
3 Toby believes in saving as much as possible. Catalina prefers to spend all the money they earn. (poles)
4 Being a student’s one thing; being a teacher’s quite another. (world)
5 People in the north of the country have a totally different standard of living from those in the south.
(gap)
64.4 Write a sentence before each of these sentences.
I expected Lydia to be tall and dark.1 The reverse was true; she was short, with fair hair.
2 On the other hand, it does have a big garden, so I think we
should rent it.
3 On the contrary, the number of cars on the road is
increasing yearly.
4 In contrast, in Britain you drive on the lef.
5 Quite the opposite; I feel quite full. I had a huge breakfast.
64.5 Choose between on the other hand and on the contrary and explain what the speaker means.
on the contrary1 I’m not worried; , I feel quite calm. It's not true that I'm worried.
2 It’s expensive, but , we do need it.
3 In some ways I’d like to change my job, but , I’d miss all my colleagues.
4 I don’tthink he’s lazy; , he puts in a great deal of effort.
5 She doesn’tspeak Japanese well; , she only knows a couple of phrases.
6 This hotel looks very attractive; , it’s more expensive than the first one we
looked at.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 135
