74 Compound adjectives
A Form and meaning
A compound adjective has two parts. It is usually written with a hyphen, e.g. well-dressed,
never-ending, sky-blue. Its meaning is usually clear from the combined words. The second part of the
adjective is often a present participle (ending in -ing) or past participle (ending in -ed, except for irregular
verbs).
Language help
Some compound adjectives use a hyphen before a noun but not after a verb (e.g. a well-dressed
man but He is always well dressed).
B Personal appearance
A number of compound adjectives describe personal appearance. Here is a rather far-fetched
description of a person starting from the head down. [hard to believe]
Tom was a curly-haired, suntanned, blue-eyed, rosy-cheeked,
thin-lipped, broad-shouldered, left-handed, long-legged young
man, wearing an open-necked shirt, brand-new, tight-fitting jeans
and open-toed sandals.
C Personality and character
Other compound adjectives describe a person’s character.
Melissa was absent-minded [forgetful], easy-going [relaxed], good-tempered [cheerful], warm-
hearted [kind] and quick-witted [quick-thinking/sharp], if perhaps a little big-headed [proud of
herself], two-faced [not sincere], self-centred [always thinking about herself instead of others] and
stuck-up [thinks she’s better than other people (informal)] at times.
D Prepositions and particles
Another special group of compound adjectives has a preposition or particle in its second part.
The workers’declaration of an all-out strike forced management to improve conditions. [total]
Once there were fields here but now it’s a totally built-up area.
That student’s parents are very well-off [rich] but they don’tgive him much money and he is always
complaining of being hard-up. [poor]
I love these shoes and, although they’re worn-out, I can’tthrow them away.
This area was once prosperous but it now looks very run-down. [in a very bad condition]
E Collocations
Here are some other compound adjectives with typical noun collocations.
air-conditioned rooms bullet-proof windows on the President’s car business-class ticket
cut-price goods in the sales duty-free items handmade furniture interest-free credit
last-minute revision for an exam long-distance lorry driver long-standing relationship
off-peak train travel [at a time which is less busy] part-time job so-called expert sugar-free
diet time-consuming writing of reports top-secret information world-famous film star
F Changing compound adjectives
You can vary the compound adjectives listed by changing one part of the adjective.
For example, curly-haired, long-haired, red-haired and wavy-haired; first-hand (knowledge), first-
class (ticket) and first-born (child).
154 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
74.1 What compound adjectives from the opposite page can describe ...
never-ending1 a problem that never ends? a(n) problem
2 a shirt whose neck is open and which fits tightly? a(n) ,
shirt
3 a girl who has long legs and brown eyes? a(n) , girl
4 very new sandals that have open toes? , sandals
5 a boy who dresses well and is brown from the sun? a(n) ,
boy
6 a person who is very relaxed and kind? a(n) , person
7 a boy who has curly hair and is sharp? a(n) , boy
8 a story that is difficult to believe? a(n) story
74.2 Fill the gaps with the words from the box to form new compound adjectives.
Use a dictionary if necessary.
tight blue man broad brown
bullet fire water loose green
hand sugar second narrow business
right home absent duty left
blue1 4 7
-eyed -minded -fitting
8
2 5 -handed
-proof -made
3 6
-class -free
74.3 Complete the sentences using compound adjectives from D and E opposite.
down1 It was an old, run- hotel that needed modernising. None of the rooms were
air- and the so- restaurant was just a coffee bar. Our room had
an old, -out carpet that was dirty.
2 It’s a very -up coast, with hotels and villas everywhere.
3 We managed to get a -minute booking for a Mediterranean cruise.
4 Off- train travel is much cheaper than travelling at busy times, but
long- travel by train can sometimes be more expensive than flying.
5 The route of the President’s drive to Parliament was secret and he was driven in a
bullet- limousine.
6 The workers went on -out strike over a long- pay dispute and the airport
was closed for three days.
7 She used to be quite well- but she lost a lot of money and now she has a
-up look about her. She got a part- job to help pay the bills.
8 She has to have a sugar- diet but it’s very time- trying to make sure
everything she buys has no sugar in it.
74.4 Over to you
Which of the adjectives from this unit could you use to describe yourself or your friends or members
of your family?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 155
