Politics and public institutions38
A Types of government
republic: a state governed by representatives and, usually, a president (e.g. USA, France)
monarchy: a state ruled by a king or queen (e.g. UK, Sweden)
federation: a union of political units (e.g. provinces) under a central government (e.g. USA)
democracy: government of, by and for the people
dictatorship: system of government run by a dictator
independence: freedom from outside control; self-governing
Presidential and parliamentary government (US and UK)B
United States Presidential government: The powers of the President
and the legislature (Congress) are separate. These branches of
government are elected1 separately. The President is elected for a
four-year term and can appoint2 or nominate high officials in government,
including cabinet members (who advise) and federal judges. The
President leads a major party, usually, but not always, the majority
party3 in Congress. Congress consists of two houses, the House of
Representatives and the Senate.
United Kingdom Parliamentary government: The government consists
of a legislature4 (Parliament) and a Cabinet of Ministers5 from the
majority party in Parliament. If no party has an overall majority, there may
be a coalition government formed from more than one party. The Prime
Minister is the head of the government and the leader of the majority
party in the House of Commons. The Prime Minister selects high
officials and heads6 the Cabinet. Parliament consists of two chambers,
the House of Commons and the House of Lords. MPs are members of
parliament elected from each constituency7 to the House of Commons.
1 chosen by vote 2 decide who to give positions of authority to 3 political party which won the most
votes 4 group of people who make new laws 5 group of most important ministers 6 is the leader of
7 geographical voting area
C Parliamentary elections
During a general election each constituency has to choose which politician it wants as its
representative. Usually there are several candidates to choose from. These candidates are all
standing (or running) for Parliament. They present the policies, i.e. their party’s plans. On polling
day every adult goes to the polling station and casts a vote by marking a cross on their ballot
paper. The candidate who gets the majority of votes wins the seat. If the vote is very close, the
constituency may be referred to as a marginal seat.
Language help
Here are some word families relating to words on this page.
verb person noun abstract noun
rule ruler rule
govern governor government
preside (often followed by over) president presidency
represent representative representation
elect elector; electorate (group of people) election
82 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
38.1 Circle the correct word from the choices offered.
1 A member of parliament governs / rules / represents his or her constituency.
2 India gained republic / independence / democracy from the UK in 1948.
3 On electing / voting / polling day electors cast their votes.
4 She’s running / sitting / walking for Parliament in the next election.
5 His father was voted / stood / elected MP for Cambridge City.
6 What is your country’s economic politics / policy / politician?
7 The USA is a legislature / federation / congress of 50 states.
8 Although modern monarchs are said to rule / govern / preside over their countries they have
little real power.
38.2 Look at this text about politics in the UK. Fill in the missing words.
chambersParliament in the UK consists of two 1 : the House of Commons and the House
of Lords. The country is divided into 2 , each of which elects a(n) 3
to represent it in the House of Commons. The ruling party in the Commons is the one
which gains a 4 of seats. The main figure in that party is called the 5
Sometimes more than one party may share power in a 6 government.
The Commons is elected for a maximum period of five years although the Prime Minister may
call a general 7 at any time within that period.
38.3 Match the sentence beginnings on the left with the endings on the right.
1 The President appointed his uncle c a over a Cabinet of Ministers.
2 The Prime Minister presides b on the ballot paper.
3 In last year’s election I voted c as a judge.
4 Lee says he would never want to stand d from in our constituency.
5 Put a cross beside the name you want e the seat in our constituency.
6 I haven’tdecided yet how to cast f for the Green Party candidate.
7 I’m not keen on the candidate who won g for political office.
8 We had five candidates to choose h my vote.
38.4 Find a word from the Language help section to match each definition.
1 the person with the highest political position in a republic the President
2 someone who speaks or does something officially, on behalf of a group of people
3 the leader of a country, e.g. a monarch or dictator
4 the period of office of the person with the highest political position in a republic
5 system used for controlling a country
6 the group of people who are entitled to vote
7 to act officially for a group of people
38.5 Over to you
Write a paragraph about the political system in your country. Make sure your paragraph deals with
all the following aspects of the topic appropriate to your country:
kind of government, e.g. a republic or a monarchy chambers or houses elections terms of office
government leader
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 83
