Like, dislike and desire44
A Words and expressions relating to liking
Reply Forward
Dear Anna,
Good to hear from you after so many years. Fancy you
being married!
I’m not married but I’ve got a boyfriend called Tom. I
must tell you about him. We’ve known each other for
three years. I quite liked him when we first met, but I
didn’t really fancy him in any big way. I did like being with
him - he fascinated me with his stories of his travels
around the world and something mysterious about his
past attracted me. What’s more, we were both keen on
sailing. Little by little I fell in love with him. His sense
of humour appealed to me and I was captivated by
his smiling eyes. Now, three years later, I can’t see why I
didn’t fall for him the moment we met. He’s a very caring
person, fond of animals and small children. He’s always
affectionate and loving towards me and passionate
both about me and about the things he believes in
and the people he cares for. I hope we’ll always be as
devoted to each other as we are now.
Do write again soon and tell me all about your life!
Love,
Amy
Words and expressions relating to dislikingB
Loathe, detest, despise, cannot stand and cannot bear are all stronger ways of saying ‘dislike’and
they are all followed by a noun or an -ing form.
I loathe / detest / despise / can’tstand / can’tbear bad-mannered people. I can’tbear listening to
her stupid stories.
Repel, revolt, appal and disgust are strong words used to describe the negative effect which
something has on a person.
His films disgust me. I was revolted by the way he spoke. We were appalled by the conditions in the
refugee camp. His behaviour repels everyone.
Words and expressions relating to desiringC
Desire is either a formal verb to express a sexual wish for someone or a formal word for wish.
He desired her the moment he saw her. I have a strong desire to see the Himalayas before
I die.
Look forward to means think about something in the future with pleasant anticipation. It is followed
by a noun or an -ing form. The opposite is dread, which is rather strong.
I’m looking forward to going to Fiji but I’m dreading the long flight.
Long for means to wish for something very much. Yearn for is a more poetic way of saying long for.
After this long, cold winter, I’m longing for spring. He will never stop yearning for his country
although he knows he can never return.
94 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
44.1 Complete the sentences with words from A opposite and add the missing prepositions.
1 Jack and Lily are very d evoted to each other.
2 Mrs Williams is very f her son-in-law.
3 Are you k rugby? There’s a big match on TV tonight.
4 Spending a whole day with my cousins doesn’ta me.
5 We just looked at each other and we f love immediately.
6 She’s so beautiful. I f her the moment I saw her.
7 Our grandmother was always very a us when we were little and hugged us every
time she saw us.
8 She’s very p wildlife and c sick animals in the local animal
rescue centre.
44.2 Rewrite the sentences, changing the meaning as little as possible. Use the word in brackets.
I quite like him.1 I’m fond of him. (quite like)
2 I strongly dislike jazz. (stand)
3 Do you think Ethan is attractive? (fancy)
4 She likes rowing and golf. (keen)
5 I loathe very salty food. (bear)
6 His art attracts me. (appeal)
7 I find Gina very interesting. (fascinate)
8 She has totally charmed him. (captivate)
9 I’m dreading the exam. (look)
44.3 In each pair of sentences which person probably feels more strongly, a or b?
1 a He’s devoted to his sister. b He’s very fond of his sister. a
2 a I dislike his poetry. b I loathe his poetry.
3 a She’s yearning to see him. b She’s longing to see him.
4 a I’m not really looking forward to the exam. b I’m absolutely dreading the exam.
44.4 Correct the mistakes in these sentences. There may be more than one mistake in the
sentence.appalled
1 I was appealed by the terrible conditions in the prison. They were simply inhuman.
2 I can’tbare selfish people. I dispose anyone who never considers others.
3 Her manner repealed me at first and I wouldn’tstand being in the same room as her, but now I’ve
begun to like her more.
4 I felt a strong desire of finding out what had happened to my old school friends.
5 Are you looking forward to start your new job?
6 I felt absolutely disgusting by his unkind remarks about Sylvia.
44.5 Over to you
Answer the questions.
1 What characteristics in people do you most detest?
2 Would you describe yourself as a caring person? In what ways do you show it?
3 What issues are you passionate about? Why?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 95
