33 Science and technology
New sciencesA
You are probably familiar with the traditional branches of science, e.g. chemistry, physics, botany
and zoology. But what about these more recently established fields?
field definition / applications
Works with genetic material (DNA) of living things to alter1 features2. GMgenetic engineering
foods (genetically modified foods) are grown in some parts of the world.
Studies the design of physical working spaces and how people interact3 withergonomics
them.
The study of the structure4 and function5 of the molecules6 associated7 withmolecular biology
living things.
Technology which enables8 machines to interpret9 speech, e.g. voice-to-textvoice technology
software.
The study of the use of human cells10 to treat diseases and injury and tostem cell research
repair the body.
The creation11 of exact copies of plants or animals with the same genes ascloning
the original plants or animals.
The science of growing plants without using soil12.hydroponics
1 change, usually slightly 2 typical qualities or important parts 3 communicate with or react to
4 the way that parts of a system are organised 5 purpose 6 the basic chemical units / groups of atoms
7 connected in our mind 8 makes possible 9 decide the intended meaning of 10 smallest basic part
11 making something new that did not exist before 12 the top layer of the earth’sof a plant or animal
surface, in which plants grow
Everyday technologyB
3D TVsmartphone tablet satnav/GPS [satellite digital photohigh-definition
framenavigation / Global(HD) camcorder Positioning System]
Verbs used in science and technologyC
Note the collocations in bold.
He experimented with different materials before utilising1 the most suitable one.
The technician pressed a button and lights started flashing.
When she pulled the large lever2, the wheel began to rotate3. .
The zoologist dissected4 the animal and extracted5 its organs.
When they were combined, the two chemicals reacted violently with each other.
After analysing the problem, she concluded that there was a flaw6 in the theory.
Insert7 the disk into the DVD drive to install8 the software or visit the website to download it.
1 use (fml technical/scientific) 2 bar or handle that moves in order to control something (e.g. a machine)
3 turn (fml technical/scientific) 4 cut open (usually a dead body or plant) to study its parts 5 took out (fml
6 fault, mistake or weakness 7 put in (fml technical/scientific) 8 make it ready to usetechnical/scientific)
72 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
33.1 Fill the gaps with words from A. Then say what branch of science each person is probably
talking about.
hydroponicsoil1 We grow the plants in liquids, without using s . Science:
2 The software i your speech and e you to turn it into text.
Science:
3 We’re interested in workplaces and how people i with their working environment.
Science:
4 People are often worried. They feel that the c of an exact copy of an animal is not
morally right. Science:
5 We study how human c can be used to rebuild our bodies and to repair them when they
are injured. Science:
6 My work is concerned with the s and f of the organic molecules
a with living organisms. Science:
7 Many people refuse to eat g m foods. They consider GM foods to be
unnatural. Science:
8 By manipulating DNA, we can a hereditary f . Science:
33.2 What item do you think each person needs from B?
3 ‘I’d love to be able1 2 ‘Myphone is so old I can’t‘Ikeep losing my way and to look at my photos
I’m not good at reading take any videos with it.’ any time I want to.’
maps.’ a satnav
4 6‘Myold camcorder ‘Iwant something like5doesn’tproduce ‘Itwas a fantastic film. I didn’t a laptop with a touch
really sharp movies.’ mind wearing the special screen that I can watch
glasses. It was so realistic. I’d love films on or read ebooks.’
to be able to do that at home.’
33.3 Match the sentence beginnings on the left with the endings on the right.
c1 These chemicals a that button, it turns the printer on.
2 If you pull b to flash after a few seconds.
3 The zoologist extracted c react with each other.
4 When you press d in the theory.
5 They experimented e that lever, it starts the machine.
6 I believe there is a flaw f the animal to see why it died.
7 They had to dissect g the organs from the animal.
8 A red light started h with different liquids.
33.4 Use technical/scientific words from C instead of the words in bold.
rotate1 The wheel began to turn very quickly.
2 Put in the disk to get the software ready to work .
3 We can put these chemicals together .
4 You should use the strongest material.
5 We looked into the problem and decided that it was a computer virus.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 73
