Containers and contents88
A
basket bowl box bucketbag barrel bottle
case crate(e.g. for glasses) jugcan carton glass jar mug
pack packet pan pot sack tin tub /tʌb/ tube /tʃuːb/
B More information about these containers
container usually made of typical contents
bag cloth, paper, plastic sweets, shopping, mail
barrel wood and metal oil, wine, beer
basket wicker, metal shopping, clothes, waste paper
bottle glass, plastic milk, lemonade, wine
bowl china, glass, wood fruit, soup, sugar
box cardboard, wood matches, tools, toys, chocolates
bucket metal, plastic sand, water
can tin cola, beer
carton card milk, juice
case leather, wood, cardboard jewellery, spectacles, wine
crate wood, plastic bottles
glass glass milk, water, wine
jar glass, pottery jam, honey, olives, instant coffee
jug pottery milk, cream, water
mug pottery tea, coffee, cocoa
pack card cards, six cans of cola/beer
packet card, paper, plastic tea, biscuits, cereal, crisps
pan metal food that is being cooked
pot plastic, metal, pottery yoghurt, plant, paint
sack cloth, plastic coal, rubbish
tin tin tomatoes, sardines, fruit
tub wood, plastic, card flowers, rainwater, ice cream
tube soft metal, plastic toothpaste, paint, ointment
182 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
88.1 Complete the blanks in the shopping list without looking at the opposite page.
tube1 a of toothpaste 6 a of yoghurt
2 two of milk 7 a large of matches
3 four of cola 8 a of honey
4 a of tuna 9 six of crisps
5 a of chocolate
biscuits
88.2 Try the following quiz about the words on the opposite page.
1 Which two of the containers listed would you be most likely to find holding flowers in a garden?
a pot, a tub
2 Which three are you most likely to find in a cellar?
3 Which five of these would you be most likely to see in the drinks section of a large supermarket?
4 Which five would you be most likely to see on the breakfast table?
5 Which two containers might a postman carry the post in and which is bigger?
6 Which two are often used for carrying shopping?
88.3 Name the containers and their contents.
1 a jar of 2 3 4 5 6
peanut butter
7 8 9 10 11 12
88.4 Think of other words which are often used with the following containers.
shopping, wastepaper, linen1 basket 5 jug
2 box 6 glass
3 bottle 7 pot
4 bag
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 183
