Time53
Periods of time – words and typical contextsA
the Ice Age the Stone Age the Middle Ages the computer age
[major historical/geological periods]
After the war, a new era of stability began. [long period, perhaps several decades]
A spell of hot weather [indefinite but short period] He’s had a couple of spells in hospital in the last
two or three years.
The city went through several stages of development to become what it is today. [period of
development or particular time in a process]
Most teenagers go through a phase of being lazy. [a period which is part of a longer period; phase can
also mean the same as stage]
B Useful expressions with time
During the 1980s I lived in Barcelona for a time. [vague, indefinite period]
The doctor says you should stay in bed for the time being. [for now, not specific]
She can get a bit bad-tempered at times. [occasionally / now and then]
By the time we get home this pizza will be cold! (Note: followed by present tense, not future with will)
I’m not in regular contact with her; I just send her an email from time to time. [sometimes but not often]
One at a time, please! I can’tdeal with you all together.
We arrived just in time to hear the Prime Minister’s speech. [at the right time / with enough time to do
something]
Our plane was on time and she was waiting for us at the airport. [punctual / neither early nor late]
I’ve told you time and time again not to ring me at the office! [many times; very emphatic and usually in
negative contexts]
The city has changed a great deal over the course of time / over the course of the last two
centuries. (used about long periods of time)
Verbs associated with time passingC
2002 → 2012 Ten years had elapsed since they last saw each other. (normally used in the perfect or past,
without adverbs; fml)
Time seems to fly as you get older. [pass very quickly]
This film lasts for three hours.
The meeting went on / dragged on for two hours. (suggests longer than expected or desired;
drag on is stronger)
Adjectives describing duration (how long something lasts)D
There was a momentary loss of electrical power and the data was lost. [very brief]
I just got a fleeting glimpse of the President as his car drove past. [very short and quick]
Venice has a timeless beauty.
Common mistakes
Don’t confuse in time and on time. In time means with enough time to do something or at the right
time. On time means punctual, neither early nor late.
We got there just in time for dinner.
I expect she will be late - the trains are never on time.
112 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
53.1 Fill the gaps with age, era, period, spell, phase or stage.
period1 The Minister said that before the new law came into force there would be a of six
months when people could hand in firearms without being prosecuted.
2 The last two decades of the twentieth century will be seen by historians as the beginning of the
computer .
3 The new university will be built in three , beginning with the opening of the science
faculty in 2015.
4 These factories mark the beginning of a new of industrial development for the country.
5 My son went through a of not wanting to go to school when he was about nine or ten.
6 We had a very cold in February. All the water pipes froze up.
53.2 Complete the sentences.
Over course1 the of a century, from 1900 to 2000, the population grew steadily.
2 The lecture / for almost three hours and everyone was totally bored.
(two answers)
3 The archaeologists discovered some tools which dated from the Stone .
4 Time seems to when you’re enjoying yourself.
5 A period of seven years between the two earthquakes.
6 Shakespeare’s plays have a quality - they never grow old.
7 It was just a visit. She only stayed for about ten minutes.
8 There was a pause as the official considered her answer. Then she said
she would try to help us.
53.3 Which phrases from B could you use in the following situations? Write exactly what you
might say.
1 To a child who leaves the fridge door open
despite being told off often.
I've told you time and time again not to leave the fridge
door open!
2 To someone you’re happy to see who arrives just
as you are serving tea/coffee.
3 On a birthday card you expect will arrive at
someone’s address after you arrive in
New York.
4 A large group of people want to talk to you but
you’d prefer to see them individually.
5 Ask someone to use an old computer while the
new one is being repaired.
6 Tell someone you’lldo your best to arrive punctually at a meeting.
7 Explain to someone that the weather can be very hot in your city occasionally.
8 Tell someone you enjoy a game of tennis sometimes but not often.
53.4 Over to you
Your country/culture may have names for important periods of its history (for example, British people
often refer to the years 1840-1900 as the ‘Victorian era/period’ because the monarch at the time was
Queen Victoria). Make a list in English of important historical periods from your culture.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 113
