23 Physical geography
Geographical featuresA
You have to be careful about the use of ‘the’ with geographical features.
use with ‘the’? example
countries no France
countries which are in a plural form yes the USA, the Philippines
individual mountains no Mount Everest
mountains in the Bernese Oberland yes the Jungfrau /ˈjʊŋfraʊ/
mountain chains yes the Himalayas /hɪməˈleɪjəz/
islands no Sicily
groups of islands yes the West Indies
rivers yes the Volga
oceans yes the Pacific
seas yes the Mediterranean /medɪtəˈreɪniən/
gulfs, bays and straits yes the Gulf of Mexico, the Bay of Biscay, the
Strait of Malacca
lakes no Lake Erie
currents yes the Gulf Stream
Language help
Although most countries do not take ‘the’, they do need the definite article when they are
followed by a phrase limiting the meaning, e.g. the Japan of today, the France we know from
paintings, the South America of the past.
Geographical features in IcelandB
Iceland An island republic in the North Atlantic. The
landscape consists largely of barren plains1 and
mountains, with large ice fields particularly in the south
west. The island has active volcanoes2 and is known for
its thermal3 springs and geysers4. With less than 1% of
the land suitable for growing crops5, the nation’s economy
is based on fishing, and fish products account for 80%
of the exports. Area: 103,000 km2. Population: 318,000.
Capital: Reykjavik.
1 flat land where little grows 2 volcanoes that still erupt
3 hot 4 hole in the ground that sends out hot water and
5 food that is grownsteam
The sea, rivers and mountainsC
Where land meets sea: coast, shore, beach
Words connected with rivers: valley, gorge [valley with very
steep sides], stream [small river]
Words connected with mountains: foot, ridge, peak,
summit, glacier [river of ice]
52 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
23.1 Find words on the opposite page that match the definitions.
1 a movement of water in a particular direction current
2 the wide part of a river at its mouth
3 the top of a mountain (two words)
4 the place where a river starts
5 the land along the edge of a sea or lake
6 a narrow stretch of sea between two areas of land
7 a long piece of land sticking out into the sea or a lake
8 a long narrow high part of a mountain
23.2 In the paragraph below all the instances of the have been River Amazon
omitted. Insert them wherever they are necessary.
theBrazil is ∧fifth largest country in world. In north,
densely forested basin of River Amazon covers half Brazil
country. In east, country is washed by Atlantic. Brasilia
Highest mountain chain in South America, Andes,
does not lie in Brazil. Brazil’s most famous city Rio de Janeiro
is Rio de Janeiro, former capital. Today capital of
Brazil is Brasilia.
23.3 Can you answer the following general knowledge geography quiz?
Mount Kilimanjaro1 What is the highest mountain in Africa?
2 What is the longest river in Europe?
3 Where is the highest waterfall in the world?
4 Name another country, apart from Iceland, which has geysers and hot springs.
5 What is a delta and which famous river has one?
6 Where are the Straits of Gibraltar and the Cape of Good Hope?
23.4 Find 17 more words for geographical features. Words go horizontally or vertically but
not diagonally.
23.5 Give two nouns from the opposite page to go with the adjectives below. Try not to
repeat any of the nouns you choose.
beach1 sandy 4 rocky
2 steep 5 turbulent
3 shallow 6 dangerous
23.6 Over to you
Draw a map of a country or area that interests you. Write the English names of its main
geographical features on it. Write a paragraph about the geography of the area.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 53
