Number, quantity, degree and intensity51
A Number and quantity
Number is used for countable nouns (e.g. a large number of students), amount for uncountable nouns
(e.g. a large amount of money).
Some adjectives for expressing number and quantity:
smaller bigger
minute /maɪnjuːt/ average significant excessive vast
tiny considerable substantial enormous
Even minute amounts of toxic material can be dangerous. (fml)
Add just a tiny amount of chilli pepper, or else it may get too hot.
Were there many people at the airport? Oh, about average, I’d say. (fairly informal)
A considerable number of people failed to get tickets. (fml)
A significant number of students have dropped out of university in the last year.
[noticeably large]
Substantial amounts of money have been wasted on this project. (fml)
There is an excessive amount of sugar in many soft drinks. [too much; rather formal]
A vast / An enormous quantity of sand was blown on to the road during the storm.
Informal words for number/quantityB
I’ve got dozens of nails in my tool box. [a dozen is 12; dozens of means many; especially used for
countables]
Scores of people were injured when the gas tank exploded. [a score is 20 or about 20; scores of means a
large number of; usually formal]
There’s heaps/bags/loads of time yet, slow down! (usually with singular there is, not there are; countable
or uncountable; infml)
There was absolutely tons of food at the party – far too much. (again, note singular there was; especially
used for things, not so often used for abstract nouns)
There are tons of apples on this tree this year – last year there were hardly any.
(Note: The verb here is plural because of ‘apples’, but singular in the example before with ‘food’– number
depends on the noun following, not on tons/lots/loads.)
Just a drop of milk for me, please. [tiny amount of any liquid]
Degree and intensity: collocations with utter(ly), total(ly), whollyC
Utter(ly), total(ly) and wholly mean complete(ly).
Utter combines with ‘strong’nouns like nonsense, contempt, silence, confusion, chaos
and despair.
There was utter chaos during the transport strike.
Utterly combines with adjectives such as ridiculous, confused and impossible.
I was utterly confused by the instruction manual that came with my camcorder!
Total combines most often with disbelief and ban, e.g. She looked at him in total disbelief. The
government introduced a total ban on smoking in public places.
Totally combines most often with different, unexpected, unsuitable and wrong, e.g.
The two brothers have totally different personalities.
Wholly combines most often with dependent, inadequate and unacceptable, e.g.
The success of the project was wholly dependent on the weather.
108 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
51.1 Complete the sentences with words from A opposite.
onsiderable1 It takes a c amount of time to learn to ski well.
2 A s quantity of food is thrown away every day by supermarkets. It’s a scandal. (two
possible answers)
3 The scientists found only a m amount of the chemical in the food and said it was safe
to eat.
4 We ate an e amount of food at dinner last night! (two possible answers)
5 V amounts of money are wasted by government departments every year.
6 The number of students registering for our courses is about a for the autumn semester.
7 A t amount of water had got into the keyboard and it stopped working.
8 Last year we didn’treally notice an increase in prices, but this year the increase has been
s .
51.2 Use words from A to fill the gaps. More than one answer may be possible.
1 Even a tiny / minute amount of sand can damage a camera.
2 I’ve had an absolutely amount of work lately. I’m exhausted!
3 Oh, you’ve given me a amount of food here! I mustn’teat too much.
4 It takes a amount of money to start a business.
5 An amount of fat in your diet is dangerous.
51.3 Circle the most suitable answer. More than one may be correct.
1 Tons / Scores / Bags of people came on to the streets to hear his speech.
2 We’ve got loads / scores / dozens of time. The train doesn’tleave till 2.30.
3 There was / were tons of food left over after the dinner party.
4 I’ve got heap / loads / dozens of CDs that I never play any more.
5 There was / were dozens of people waiting outside the building.
51.4 Using intensifiers from C, write what you could say in the following situations.
1 You thoughtsomeone’s views were completely ridiculous. His/Her views were utterly ridiculous.
2 You read two novels by the same author which were completely different.
3 You thought someone’s behaviour was completely unacceptable.
4 You thought a particular way of working produced chaos.
5 You listened to someone’s story and did not believe a word of it.
6 You think there should be a complete ban on using mobile phones in cinemas.
51.5 Over to you
Write sentences that are true for you using these collocations:
wholly dependent utterly confused totally unexpected utter nonsense
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 109
