Words that only occur in the plural84
A Tools, instruments, pieces of equipment
scissors pliers earphones tweezers tongs headphones
binoculars scales handcuffs shears glasses/ goggles
spectacles
B Things we wear
clothes pyjamas knickers/pants underpants/pants jeans tights overalls
leggings dungarees shorts trousers braces (swimming) trunks
C Other useful words
The graphics in this game are amazing! [pictures produced on a computer]
When will the goods be delivered? [articles/items]
The architect inspected the foundations [under the building] before declaring that the premises were
safe. [the building itself]
The military authorities have established their headquarters in the old Town Hall.
The acoustics in the new opera house are near perfect. [quality of the sound]
The contents /ˈkɒntents/of the house were sold after her death.
Looks are less important than personality in a partner.
As you come to the outskirts of the village, there are traffic lights. Turn left there. [the beginning or
end of the village]
The stairs are a bit dangerous - be careful.
The proceeds of the concert are going to the children’s fund. [money from selling tickets]
A terrorist has escaped from prison. Her whereabouts are unknown. [where she is]
Words with plural form but used mostly with singular verbsD
Names of some games: billiards dominoes draughts darts bowls cards
Names of subjects/activities: physics economics classics gymnastics athletics
Common mistakes
Some words look plural, or may be thought of as plural, but are not, e.g. news, spaghetti (an Italian
plural form), series, means. The news is good. (NOT The news are good.) The spaghetti was delicious.
(NOT The spaghetti were delicious.) There was a series of programmes on TV about Japan. Is there a
cheap means of transport I could use to get there?
174 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
84.1 Make a list of subjects you studied at school or elsewhere. How many of the words are
plural? Use a dictionary if necessary.
84.2 Which things listed on the opposite page can be used to:
1 cut a hedge? shears 5 protect your clothes if you’re repairing a car?
2 help you to read small print? 6 look at distant objects?
3 cut paper? 7 get a nail out of a piece of wood?
4 hold your trousers up? 8 keep a prisoner’s hands together?
84.3 Name the items on the clothes line and tick the words that are only used in the plural.
2
5
1
3 74
6
shirt1 2 3 4 5 6 7
84.4 Fill the gaps with an appropriate plural-form noun.
pyjamas1 (to a child) Come on! Get your on! It’s time to go to bed.
2 The of the rock concert are going to two charities.
3 The in the new concert hall are superb. I’ve never heard such clear sound.
4 The escaped prisoner is tall, dark and has a beard. His are unknown.
5 You must use or if you want to listen to your music
on a train.
6 The have forbidden the import of all foreign
7 Computer were first used in films in the 1970s.
84.5 Odd one out. In each group, one of the nouns is always used in the plural. Which one?
1 sock, trouser, slipper - trousers 3 knife, scissor, razor
2 billiard, squash, tennis 4 tracksuit, costume, dungaree
84.6 In this silly story, change the singular nouns to plural where appropriate. Change the
verbs where necessary.
I decided that if I wanted to be a pop star I’d have to move to London. I finally got a room, but
it was on the outskirt of the city. The owner didn’t live on the premise, so I could make as much
noise as I liked. The acoustic in the bathroom was fantastic, so I practised there. I made so
much noise I almost shook the foundation! I went to the headquarter of the Musicians’ Union,
but a guy there said I just didn’t have the right looks to be famous. Oh well, never mind!
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 175
