Countable and uncountable nouns85 with different meanings
Countable and uncountable nounsA
When we use a countable noun we are thinking of specific things that can be counted (e.g. two
glasses). When we use an uncountable noun we are thinking of stuff or material or the idea of a
thing in general (e.g. this door is made of glass).
stuff/materials things
a glass / glassesglass
cloth a cloth
fish a fish
work a work
Be careful - there’s broken glass on the road. I need a cloth to wipe the table.
We had fish for dinner. Hamlet is one of Shakespeare’s most famous works.
Here are some more nouns that can be used in both ways with different meanings.
countable uncountable
There’s a black hair in my soup; it must be yours! She has beautiful red hair.
Did you buy a paper this morning? [a newspaper] The printer has run out of paper.
They are campaigning to help indigenous peoples of I love meeting people from different
South America. countries. [individuals]
Can I borrow your iron? My shirt is a bit creased. People used to think ships made of iron
[instrument] would sink. [metal]
I had some interesting experiences during my trip to She has little work experience. [knowledge
Latin America. [things that happened to me] or skill obtained from doing something]
The city has a yearly arts festival. [music, Have you been to the modern art museum?
theatre, etc.] It’s wonderful. [usually refers to painting,
He studied arts not sciences at uni. [subjects such as drawing and sculpture]
languages or history; always plural and without the]
I’ve seen that film three times. [occasions] Time passes very slowly if you have a boring
We had some good times at university. [experiences] job. [clock time, calendar time]
B Food
The names of food items often have a different meaning depending on whether they are used as
countable or uncountable nouns (see fish above).
coffee/tea a coffee and two teas
potato Just two potatoes, please!
Would you like some chocolate? Would you like a chocolate?
salt and pepper a pepper
a hot dog with onion an onion
176 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
85.1 Would you normally expect to find these things in most people’s houses, flats, garages
or gardens? In which room or place? Answer for both meanings (countable and
uncountable).
1 an iron / iron Yes, most people have an iron to iron their clothes; they might keep it in the kitchen somewhere.
Most people don’t normally keep iron (the metal) at home, but they might have things made of iron (e.g. a frying
pan) in the kitchen.
2 a cloth / cloth
3 a fish / fish
4 glass / a glass
5 a wood / wood
6 pepper / a pepper
7 paper / a paper
85.2 Which question would you ask? Could I have/borrow a(n) ...? or Could I have/borrow some ...?
1 cake Could I have some cake? 5 paper
2 iron 6 rubber
3 pepper 7 glass
4 chocolate
85.3 Complete the answers using the word in brackets. Use a(n) or the if the meaning is countable.
a cloth - just wipe it up.1 Ohdear!I’vespiltwateronthefloor!(cloth)Nevermind.Here’s
2 How did you get that puncture in your car tyre? (glass) I drove
3 (child) Daddy, what are car tyres made of? (rubber) They’re made
4 Have you worked in a primary school before? (experience) No, I don’t
5 I wonder who won the general election in Sweden? (paper) We could buy
6 (child) Mum, what’s the Mona Lisa? (work) It’s
7 What’s your favourite ice-cream flavour? (chocolate) My favourite
85.4 What is the difference between (a) and (b) in each pair? Check in a dictionary if you’re
not sure.
1 a She was always a great lover of the arts.
b Are you an art lover?
theatre, music, etc.a Arts here means b Art here means
2 a (road sign) PLANT AND HEAVY MACHINERY CROSSING
b I’ve bought you a house plant.
a Plant here means b A plant here means
3 a There was a lot of damage to the car as a result of the accident.
b The film star won $500,000 in damages because the story in the newspaper was untrue.
a Damage here means b Damages here means
4 a I’ve had some bad times at the dentist’s!
b How many times have you been to the dentist’s this year?
a Times here means b Times here means
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 177
