Clothes27
A Some items of clothing
At this level you probably already know most of the everyday words for clothes. Here are some items
of clothing or parts of them which are perhaps less familiar.
hoodie
hood bikini
sleevecollar cuff
hemzippyjamas badge
laces
belt sole heelbuckle bra helmet slippers
Language help
Most items of clothing covering the legs are plural words only. If you wish to count them, you need
to say, e.g. Six pairs of trousers/shorts/tights/jeans/underpants or Jamie’s football shorts are too
small for him now. I need to get him a new pair.
B Verbs associated with clothing
Can I try on these grey shoes in the window?
I love dressing up for parties as I normally wear jeans.
The skirt is too tight and too short - it needs letting out and letting down.
The dress is too loose and too long - it needs taking in and taking up.
He changed out of his weekend clothes into his uniform.
Red usually doesn’tsuit people with ginger hair.
Her black bag matches her shoes.
Those shoes don’tfit my son any more. He’s grown out of them.
C Adjectives for describing people’s clothing
How things fit: baggy [loose] close-fitting [tight]
Style: long-sleeved sleeveless V-neck round-neck
Materials: denim [jeans are usually made of this] woollen
[made of wool] suede [a kind of leather that isn’t shiny] pinstriped spotted
plain striped checked flowery tartan
D Other words and expressions useful for talking about clothing
Anna always looks very elegant even when she’s dressed casually. [in a casual or informal way]
I don’t think it’s worth spending money on designer sunglasses. [made by a famous or fashionable designer]
Does your country have a special national costume?
Alessandra’s put her top on inside out - I can see the label!
The burglars wore masks and hoods as a disguise in the hope that no one would be able to
recognise them on CCTV.
60 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
27.1 Which words illustrated in A opposite fit best in the following sentences?
belt.1 I’ve eaten too much - I’llhave to loosen my
2 I must get my black shoes repaired. One is broken and both the
have holes in them.
3 Do up your or you’llfall over.
4 It’s not very warm today. You should wear a over your shirt.
5 Put your on - this floor is very cold.
6 I’ve almost finished making my dress for the party but I’ve still got to take up the
and sew on some .
7 It’s starting to rain - why don’tyou put your up so you don’tget wet.
8 Come on, children. It’s time for bed. Go and put your on.
9 You must wear a when you ride a motorbike.
10 Maya went on holiday last week. She packed her beach towel but forgot her
so she couldn’tgo swimming.
27.2 Complete these sentences with any appropriate word. Use pair where it is necessary.
pair of jeans..1 Josh badly needs to buy a new
2 Blue are a kind of international uniform for young people.
3 It’s too cold for . Put your trousers on.
4 Dad needs some new underpants. Can you buy him three today?
5 I’ve got a hole in my tights. I’llhave to change into a new .
27.3 Write two items of clothing that collocate with these adjectives.
top, jeans1 close-fitting 4 woollen
2 baggy 5 suede
3 checked 6 denim
27.4 Which words and expressions from D do these pictures illustrate?
1 Natasha always
looks elegant.. 2 Japanese 3
4 5 He's turned his pockets
27.5 Put the right verb, match, suit or fit, into each of these sentences.
fits1 The blue dress her perfectly now she’s had it taken in.
2 The blue of her dress the blue of her eyes.
3 That blue dress the girl with the blonde hair.
4 I can lend you a pair of slippers if you like. I think these ones should .
27.6 Over to you
Describe in as much detail as you can how you are dressed. Use as many words as you can from this unit.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 61
