Commenting on problematic situations50
A Types of problems and difficulties
There are many words for different types of The earthquake was a dreadful disaster for thedifficulties. Chaos is a state of total confusion, country. The transport system was in chaos forwhere there is no order at all. A disaster is an some time afterwards. The government wereevent which causes great harm or damage. If you faced with a dilemma: start reconstructionare facing a dilemma or are in a dilemma you work at once or wait until the likelihood ofare in a situation where you have to make aftershocks had passed.a difficult decision between two things.
to be in a fix = be in a difficult situation to be in a tight corner = be in a situation that is hard to
get out of to be in a muddle = be confused / mixed up
The word challenge puts a positive slant on a problem situation in that it focuses on the fact that it
needs great mental or physical effort in order to be done successfully and therefore tests a person’s
ability.
B Specific difficulties
You can be badly affected1 by all sorts of things, from those that are mildly irritating2 to the
intensely annoying3.
1 things can have a negative impact on you 2 slightly annoying 3 extremely annoying
Your plans may be disrupted. [prevented from continuing as intended]
Negotiations or a building may collapse. [fail because of a lack of support]
You can be deprived of something you value. [have something taken away from you]
Someone’s heart can be broken. [made extremely sad]
Your life may lack something that you would like. [not have (enough of) something]
The nouns related to the words in this section are effect, irritant or irritation, annoyance,
disruption, collapse, deprivation, heartbreak and lack.
Idioms about dealing with problems and difficultiesC
to take a back seat [not to do anything; let others act instead] ≠ to take the bull by the horns
[act positively to face and attack the problem]
to stir things up [do/say things that make the situation worse] ≠ to pour oil on troubled waters
[do/say things that calm the situation down]
I can’tface (the thought of) clearing up all this mess today. [don’twant to deal with]
I thought it would be best just to lay my cards on the table. [state exactly what my position is]
This has to be done by next week; we must get our act together before it’s too late. [organise
ourselves to respond; infml]
We need a proper investigation to get to the bottom of things. [find the true explanation]
It’s quite difficult to get people to sit up and take notice. [make them pay attention]
I’m trying to get a grasp of what’s happening; it’s not easy. [find out / understand]
Idioms relating to changes in problem situationsD
The tide has turned for us; better days are ahead.
We can see the light at the end of the tunnel at last. [see that a difficult situation may be ending soon]
I’m afraid we’ve just come to a dead end with our plans.
I think I’ve reached a turning point in my career.
The government and the unions have buried the hatchet for the time being. [made peace / stopped
fighting each other]
All that trouble last year was just swept under the carpet in the end. [ignored / deliberately forgotten,
without solving it]
106 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
50.1 Choose the best word from A opposite to complete these sentences.
1 Can you help Grandpa fill out that form? It’s so long and complicated that he’s getting in a bit
muddle .of a
2 The manager told his staff that he didn’twant to hear the word ‘problems’, but rather they should talk
about .
3 After the earthquake, city transport was in .
4 I wonder if you could help me out - I’m in a bit of a tight .
5 Should I take the job in New York or the one in Sydney? It’s quite a .
6 The floods are the worst natural the country has experienced this century.
50.2 Match the sentence beginnings with the words on the right and add a preposition to
complete the sentence.
on c1 Ben decided he would immediately lay his cards. a troubled waters.
2 The best thing to do is just to take the bull b her life.
3 Fortunately we can now see the light at the end c the table.
4 It’lltake ages before we can get to the bottom d a dead end.
5 It’s asking for trouble to sweep things e the horns.
6 You can always rely on Naomi to pour oil f things.
7 At the moment my research seems to have come g the tunnel.
8 Claire has now reached a turning point h the carpet.
50.3 Rewrite each sentence using the word in brackets.
1 The snow caused serious disruption to trains in the region. (disrupted)
Trains in the region were seriously disrupted by the snow.
2 I don’twant to drive home in all this traffic. (face)
3 Keira doesn’tseem to have much confidence. (lacking)
4 Unfortunately, the project doesn’tseem to be getting anywhere at the moment. (dead)
5 Sleep deprivation can cause health and other problems. (deprived)
6 Paula was profoundly affected by her meeting with Angus. (effect)
50.4 Choose suitable idioms from C and D to fill the gaps.
1 Selim’s business has been going through hard times but he feels at last the tide has turned
2 No, please, don’tsay anything: you’llonly
3 It’s been a long, hard struggle, but I think finally we can
4 The police are trying their best to , but it’s still a real mystery at the
moment.
5 You’ve been messing around achieving nothing for too long; it’s time you !
6 At last I’ve managed to get him to ; he’s paid no attention at all to us
so far.
7 I found it hard to understand thermodynamics at first but I’m beginning to
it now.
8 I think I’lljust and let everyone else get on with sorting matters out.
9 I wish you and John wouldn’targue so much. Can’tyou once and for all?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 107
