Abstract nouns73
A What are abstract nouns?
An abstract noun represents an idea, experience or quality rather than an object that you
can touch. For example, advice, happiness, intention and (in)justice are abstract nouns but pen,
bed and trousers are not.
B Suffixes in abstract nouns
Certain suffixes (see Unit 70) are used frequently in abstract nouns. The most common are -ment,
-ion, -ness and -ity. The suffix -ion sometimes becomes -tion, -sion, -ation or -ition. The suffixes
-ment and -ion are usually used to make verbs into abstract nouns. The suffixes -ness
and -ity are added to adjectives.
Here are some examples of abstract nouns using those suffixes.
achievement affection carelessness activity
adjustment collection consciousness authority
amazement combination eagerness creativity
disagreement expectation friendliness curiosity
improvement frustration kindness generosity
investment limitation laziness hostility
replacement recession politeness popularity
retirement reduction weakness sensitivity
C Less common suffixes forming abstract nouns
-ship, -dom, -th and -hood
The suffixes -ship and -hood are usually added to other nouns to form abstract nouns.
The suffix -th is added to an adjective to form an abstract noun and -dom can combine
with either a noun or an adjective.
Here are some examples of abstract nouns using those suffixes.
boredom breadth adulthood
freedom depth brotherhood
kingdom length childhood
martyrdom strength motherhood
stardom warmth neighbourhood
wisdom width (wo)manhood
When he left school, Rolf trained as an electrician with a large company.
There were two other boys in a similar position and he enjoyed their
companionship. They developed such a good relationship that,
once they’d completed theirapprenticeship, they decided to go into
partnership together. Now they have set up a business under joint
ownership. They have taken out membership of the Association of
Electricians and are beginning to attract a great deal of work.
Common mistakesD Abstract nouns with no suffix
anger belief calm chance The definite article is not normally used
faith fear humour idea before an abstract noun, e.g. Love is blind.
(NOT The love is blind.) I can resist everythingluck principle rage reason
except temptation. (NOT I can resistsense sight speed thought everything except the temptation.)
152 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
73.1 What is the abstract noun related to each of the following adjectives?
friendliness1 friendly 6 strong 11 popular
2 amazed 7 angry 12 weak
3 frustrating 8 generous 13 wise
4 kind 9 polite 14 reasonable
5 hostile 10 happy 15 wide
73.2 Which verbs are related to these abstract nouns? Use a dictionary if necessary.
collect1 collection 5 strength 9 production
2 recession 6 boredom 10 ownership
3 belief 7 activity 11 expectation
4 relationship 8 sight 12 adjustment
73.3 Find a synonym with the suffix in brackets for each of the following nouns. Use a thesaurus if
necessary.
hostility1 animosity (-ity) 9 community (-hood)
2 astonishment (-ment) 10 vision (no suffix)
3 inquisitiveness (-ity) 11 liberty (-dom)
4 fraternity (-hood) 12 fury (no suffix)
5 possibility (no suffix) 13 wealth (-ity)
6 substitution (-ment) 14 maternity (-hood)
7 fame (-dom) 15 possession (-ship)
8 decrease (-tion)
73.4 Complete each of the quotations with one of the words in the box.
imitation advice injustice kingdom darkness
1 2Imitation is the Do not ask
highest form of flattery. of the ignorant.
43 Better to light a candle thanBetter to suffer to curse the .than to commit it.
5 It’s easy to govern a
but difficult to rule one’s family.
73.5 Over to you
Write your own quotations to describe the following abstract nouns. Perhaps you know a saying in
your own language that you could translate into English?
1 freedom
2 love
3 life
4 curiosity
5 imagination
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 153
