Suffixes70
A Common noun suffixes
-er /@/ is used for the person who does an activity, e.g. writer, painter, worker, shopper, teacher. You
can use -er with a wide range of verbs to make them into nouns.
Sometimes the -er suffix is written as -or (it is still pronounced /@/). It is worth making a special list of
these words as you meet them, e.g. actor, donor [person who donates something],
operator, sailor, supervisor [person whose job is to make sure that other people do their jobs correctly,
safely, etc.].
-er/-or are also used for things which do a particular job, e.g. pencil sharpener, bottle opener, grater,
projector, stapler, coat hanger.
-er and -ee (pronounced /i:/) can contrast with each other meaning ‘person who does something’
(-er) and ‘person who receives or experiences the action’(-ee), e.g. employer/employee /emplɔɪjˈiː/,
sender, addressee, payee (e.g. of a sum of money).
-tion/-sion/-ion are used to form nouns from verbs, e.g. complication, pollution, reduction,
alteration, donation, promotion, admission, action.
-ist [a person] and -ism [an activity or ideology] are used for people’s politics, beliefs and ideologies,
and sometimes their profession (compare with -er/-or professions above), e.g. Marxist, typist, physicist,
terrorist, Buddhism, journalism.
-ist is also often used for people who play musical instruments, e.g. pianist, violinist, cellist.
-ness is used to make nouns from adjectives, e.g. goodness, readiness, forgetfulness, happiness,
sadness, weakness. Note what happens to adjectives that end in -y.
B Adjective suffixes
-able/-ible /@bl/ with verbs means ‘can be done’, e.g.
drinkable washable readable forgivable edible [can be eaten] flexible [can be bent]
C Verbs
-ise (or -ize, which is more common in American English) forms verbs from adjectives, e.g. modernise
[make modern], commercialise, industrialise, computerise.
Other suffixes that can help you recognise the word classD
-ment: (nouns) excitement, enjoyment, replacement [the act of putting sb or sth in the place of
sb or sth else]
-ity: (nouns) flexibility [ability to change easily according to the situation], productivity, scarcity
-hood: (abstract nouns, especially family terms) childhood, motherhood, brotherhood
-ship: (abstract nouns, especially status) friendship, partnership, membership
-ive: (adjectives) active, passive (in language, the passive is when the receiver of an action
becomes the subject, e.g. The bank was robbed), productive [producing a positive large amount of
something]
-al: (adjectives) brutal, legal [related to or which follows the law], (nouns) refusal, arrival
-ous: (adjectives) delicious, outrageous [shocking and morally unacceptable], furious [very angry]
-ful: (adjectives) hopeful, useful, forgetful
-less: (adjectives) useless, harmless [which cannot hurt or damage anyone or anything], homeless
-ify: (verbs) beautify, purify, terrify [cause someone to be extremely afraid]
The informal suffix -ish can be added to most common adjectives, ages and times to make them less
precise, e.g. She’s thirtyish. He has reddish hair. Come about eightish.
Language help
Adding a suffix can sometimes change the stress in a word. Be sure to check in a dictionary.
Examples:
flexible → flexibility productive → productivity piano → pianist
146 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
70.1 These pictures show objects ending in -er/-or. Can you name them?
stapler1 2 3 4 5
70.2 Do these words mean a thing or a person, or can they mean both? Use a dictionary if necessary.
thing1 a cooker 3 a ticket holder 5 a cleaner 7 a drinker
2 a grater 4 an MP3 player 6 a smoker 8 an advisor
70.3 Use the -er/-or, -ee and -ist suffixes to make the names of the following. If you need to use
a dictionary, try looking up the words in bold.
1 A person who plays jazz on the piano. a jazz pianist 6 A person to whom a sum of money is paid.
2 A thing that wipes rain off your car windscreen. 7 A machine for washing dishes.
3 A person who plays classical violin. 8 A person who donates their organs
4 A person who takes professional photographs. upon their death.
5 A person who acts in amateur theatre. 9 A person to whom a letter is addressed.
70.4 Rewrite the underlined parts of the sentences using a suffix from the opposite page and
making any spelling changes needed.
1 Most of his crimes can be forgiven. Most of his crimes are forgivable .
2 The Club refuses to admit anyone not wearing shoes. The Club refuses to anyone not
wearing shoes.
3 Her only fault is that she is lazy. Her only fault is .
4 This firm has produced a lot recently. This firm has been very recently.
5 I found the book very easy and pleasant to read. I found the book very .
6 I have lovely memories of when I was a child. I have lovely memories of my .
7 You can’twash that jacket. That jacket isn’t .
8 The most important thing in life is having friends. The most important thing in
life is .
70.5 Complete the table with the different parts of speech. Do not fill the shaded boxes.
noun verb adjective
eat edible
fury
beautiful
scarce
refuse
modern
forget
act
70.6 Over to you
List six jobs you would like to have. How many different suffixes are there in your list? Do any of
the job names not have a suffix (e.g. pilot, film star)?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 147
