Social media36
A Social media verbs
My friend posted a video of I probably update my status
her baby and it was shared about twice a week. I like
over a thousand times! telling people what I’m doing.
Over 100,000 people
Send me a friend request, subscribe to his video
and then you can see the channel and follow him
pictures I took. on Twitter.
B A social media app Language help
Many of the words in this unit
are used as both nouns and
verbs. For example:Here’s our round-up of the latest apps. This month we loved
CatNapp, a new social media app that allows users to share 24 people liked my post.
information about their favourite pets. My post got 24 likes.
I commented on her status.We found it very easy to use. You create a profile of your cat, I wrote a comment on her
upload a favourite photo and include some basic information status.
about it (age, colour, favourite food). You can then post
updates about what your cat has been doing, share links1 to 1 connections to other websites
things you find interesting or comment on other cats’ profiles. 2 times people have watched itYou can rate videos of other cats’ adventures (from one to five 3 times people have clicked ‘like’stars) or see how many views2 or likes3 your post got. The 4 messages to tell you whenmost popular post each month wins a prize! something has happened
We found it a little annoying that you can’t turn off
notifications4 when a friend writes something new, but
overall cat lovers will adore it. Highly recommended.
C Online privacy
Top tips for staying safe online
On social media, it’s important to think about who can see your personal information:
• If you have to give personal information (e.g. date of birth, address) when you create an account,
make sure that it’s kept private. It’s better not to give this information if you don’thave to.
• Always check your privacy settings [choices on your account about what people see on your profile]
regularly and make sure you understand who can see what you post. For example, often your
profile picture is public, but you can usually make posts on your timeline [collection of photos
and other posts on your profile] private.
• Remember that if you are tagged [your name and a link to your profile is added] in someone else’s post,
it might be seen by a lot of people you don’tknow. You can ask people to remove the tag if necessary.
• Use direct messages [messages that only the people in the conversation can see] for private
conversations, especially if you discuss where you live, paying for things, etc.
• Delete old accounts on sites that you are not using any more. You might forget what information
they contain, or the default [what happens automatically if you don’tchange it] privacy settings
might change.
78 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
36.1 Fill in the gaps with the words below.
follow request post share subscribe status
share1 If you liked this video, please it with your friends.
2 I hate it when people hundreds of photos from their holiday.
3 Do you know Monica Coto? She’s just sent me a friend on Facebook.
4 I just updated my to tell people we’ve arrived safely at the hotel.
5 You can to our channel, and we’llemail you when a new video comes out.
6 Mo likes to chefs and food writers on Twitter.
36.2 Circle the correct word.
1 I’ve just uploaded comments / photos of Saturday’s football match to the team Facebook page.
2 Yi Ling posts / views a lot of updates about her training for the 10k run.
3 Jo posted a really interesting article about Formula 1 racing, but it didn’tget any likes / rates.
4 To enter the competition, share / view this picture on your timeline before 8 pm on Friday.
5 Did you rate / upload that restaurant we went to? I’d give it one star!
6 Elena made a video for the animal charity she works for and it got 3,000 views / uploads.
7 An old friend commented / viewed on one of my photos, asking where I was living now.
36.3 What do we call...?
profile1 The page with information about the user of social media:
2 The photo of the user:
3 The page where a person’s photos and posts appear:
4 The message a person receives when something new happens:
5 Part of a private conversation:
36.4 Fill the gaps with words from C opposite.
rivate1 I’m a teacher, so I make sure everything in my profile is p .
I don’twant my students to see it.
2 To find your p settings, click on the ‘lock’icon at the top of the screen
3 If you want everyone to be able to see that post, make sure that it’s p .
4 Please don’tt me in any of those photos - I look terrible!
5 If you want to buy the skirt, please send me a d message.
6 To create an a , you have to give your email address and a password.
7 The d setting for new posts on this site is Friends Only, but it’s easy to
change if you want to share something publicly.
36.5 Over to you
Answer these questions about yourself.
1 What was the last thing you posted on social media?
2 How many views and/or likes did it get?
3 How often do you comment on other people’s posts?
4 Have you checked your privacy settings recently? Is your profile public or private?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 79
