Possession and giving57
A Possession
All his possessions were destroyed in the terrible fire. [everything he owned]
Don’tleave any of your belongings here; we’ve had a few thefts recently. [smaller things, e.g. bag,
camera, coat; always plural]
Estate in the singular can mean a big area of private land and the buildings on it, or all of someone’s
wealth upon death.
They live on a housing estate / an estate. [area containing a large number of houses or apartments built
close together at the same time]
She owns a huge estate in Scotland. [land, etc.]
After his death, his estate was calculated at 10 million euros. [all his wealth]
Property (uncountable) is used in a general sense for houses, land, etc.
He’s only 14; he’s too young to own property.
A property (countable) is a building (e.g. house, office block) or land.
She owns some valuable properties in the town centre.
Words for people connected with ownershipB
The proprietor /prəˈpraɪətə/of this restaurant is a friend of mine. (used for shops, businesses, etc.; fml;
owner is less formal)
The landlord/landlady has put the rent up. [owner of rented property]
Do you own this house? No, we’re just tenants. [we rent it]
He inherited a big house in the country when his parents died. [became the owner after someone’s death]
C Giving Would you like to
The river provides the village with water / provides contribute/donate
water for the village. (or supplies) something to the
Jakes Ltd supplies our school with paper and other children’s hospital
items. (often for ‘selling’contexts) fund?
It gives me pleasure to present you with this gift from
us all.
His parents supported him while he was at college
but now he’s independent.
The school restaurant caters for 500 people every day.
[looks after the needs of]
That uncle of mine that died left £3,000 to an animal
shelter.
When she died she donated all her books to the library.
(for large gifts to institutions)
I’m running a marathon next week for a cancer charity.
Will you sponsor me? [give money if I complete the race] You’ve been allocated room 24.
Here’s your key.
Phrasal verbs connected with givingD
When I left the job I had to hand over the keys to my office to the new person.
I didn’treally want to let go of my bike but I had no money so I had to sell it.
The people from the charity handed out / gave out stickers for everyone to wear. [distributed]
I had a banjo once, but I gave it away. [gave it free to someone]
This vase has been handed down from generation to generation in my family.
120 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
57.1 Complete the missing words from A opposite.
1 He became a multi-millionaire and bought a huge estate in the country.
2 Some of the p in this street have sold for more than five million euros this year.
3 I left some of my b in the changing room at the gym and they were stolen.
4 On his death, Mr Carson’s e was valued at £400,000.
5 She sold all her p and travelled around the world for a year.
6 It’s often difficult for young couples to buy p and they have to rent a place instead.
57.2 The verbs in the middle column have been jumbled. Put them in the right sentences.
donated1 A millionaire inherited his entire library to the school.
2 The director was supported the best parking place.
3 My mother’s cousin donated me £5,000 in her will.
4 A farmer nearby catered us with logs for the fire.
5 When I retired they left me with a camera.
6 The restaurant allocated for vegetarians.
7 My parents presented me when I was out of work.
8 The oldest son supplied the house when his father died.
57.3 What questions using words from B and C opposite do you think were asked to get these answers?
1 Are you the owner/proprietor of this restaurant?
No, I’m not the owner. I just work here as a waiter.
2 ?
Yes, he became the owner when his aunt died. It’s a massive house.
3 ?
OK, I’llgive you one euro for every kilometre you run.
4 ?
Yes, that’s right. I pay rent every month.
5 ?
Actually, I’ve already given something. Sorry.
6 ?
No, I’m sorry, we don’t. You have to buy your own pens and exercise books.
57.4 The rise and fall of Mr Fatcatt - a sad story. Fill the gaps with suitable words from the
opposite page.
propertiesToby Fatcatt began his career by buying old 1 in the city when prices were low.
Soon he was one of the biggestprivate2 in the city, with around 1,0003 rentinghousesand flats from him. He was also the 4 of
many shopsand businesses.He becamevery rich and boughthimselfa huge 5
in Scotland,but then therewas an economiccrisisand he had to sell all his 6
and 7 - everything. He was left with just a few personal 8 and
finally died penniless.
57.5 Over to you
Think of something that ...
1 you would hand over to a mugger if threatened.
2 has been handed down in your family.
3 you have given away at some time in your life.
4 is often given out in classrooms.
5 you value and would not want to let go of.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 121
