37 The press and the media
A Radio and television
Read these extracts from TV listings.
4.00 pm Jessica: talk show1 with Jessica 7.00 pm Documentary: Are we killing our kids?
Brown; today’s guest, Rona Fredale Investigating5 the junk food industry
5.00 pm 8.00 pmCartoons2: crazy fun for kids of The Happy Couple: sitcom6 about a pairall ages of newly-weds
5.30 pm 9.00 pm Roundup: sports programme with all theGolden Chance: game show3 with
day’s top action - tonight: rugby finalBob Langley
6.00 pm News and weather forecast 10.00 pm The Day in Politics: current affairs7
programme. Presenter8: James Hill
6.30 pm Didbury Street: the nation’s 10.30 pm Wikdal: detective drama set in Norway.
favourite soap4 Episode9 3: A second body is found
1 usually has a host and famous people who answer questions about themselves 2 film where the characters
are drawn rather than real 3 show where people compete to win prizes 4 short for soap opera - a series
of TV/radio programmes about the lives of a particular group of characters, continuing over a long period and
broadcast (several times) every week 5 trying to find out the facts/truth about something 6 funny TV/
radio show where the same characters appear in a different story each week 7 news about political events
happening now 8 person who introduces the show 9 one of the parts into which a story is divided
Other expressions connected with TV and radioB
The (mass) media refers to TV, radio, newspapers and the Internet, i.e. means of communication
which reach very large numbers of people.
Subtitles enable people to read what the characters are saying (maybe in translation).
If a film is dubbed, you hear the speech in your own language.
To receive a lot of TV channels, you may need a satellite dish on the roof or wall of your house.
Many channels depend on (TV) commercials to make money. You may be able to stream radio and TV
broadcasts from the Internet and you may be Language helpable to watch catch-up TV, or TV on demand,
which allow you to watch programmes whenever The noun means (a way of doing something)
you like. A lot of radio and TV stations offer free always ends in s, even in the singular. The Internet
podcasts which you can download. is an important means of communication.
NewspapersC
A popular or tabloid newspaper usually focuses on1 sensation2 rather than real news, whereas
a quality newspaper is usually more interested in serious news. A tabloid often has stories about
celebrities, sport, scandals3 and crime, while a quality paper focuses more on serious journalism4
with in-depth5 articles. To read newspapers on the Internet, you may have to subscribe / pay a
subscription6.
1 emphasises / pays attention to 2 very exciting or interesting events 3 events which shock people in a moral
way 4 the work of collecting, writing and publishing or broadcasting news and articles 5 done carefully and in
great detail, explaining the reasons for events 6 pay a sum of money regularly (e.g. once a year)
Verbs connected with the mediaD
The BBC World Service broadcasts throughout the world. [transmits TV/radio programmes]
They’re televising the opening of Parliament tomorrow. (or, less formal: showing)
The film was shot / made on location in Australia. [filmed in a real place, not in a studio]
The series is set in London in the 1980s. [place/time where the drama happens]
Within minutes of the event, people were tweeting about it. [posting very short messages on the Internet]
Common mistakes
Remember that the noun news is uncountable and takes a singular verb. I have some news for you.
(NOT I have a news.) The news is on TV at 7 pm. (NOT The news are on TV.)
80 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
37.1 What sort of TV programmes from A opposite are these people talking about?
1 ‘Itinvestigated 2 ‘Walt Disney made a 3 ‘TheMinister of 4 ‘It’s so funny,
how the banks had lot of them. Mickey Education was on especially when the
wasted billions of Mouse was probably it, discussing the old uncle appears. We
euros in bad loans.’ his most famous.’ new schools policy.’ can’tstop laughing.’
documentary
5 ‘Mymum watches it every 6 ‘We wanted to 7 ‘They always solve 8 ‘Heinterviewed that
day. She knows all the find out if it was the murder in the young star who just
characters as if they were going to rain end, but it’s very won an Oscar, oh,
real.’ tomorrow.’ exciting.’ what’s her name?’
9 ‘Theprize is £500,000 this 10 ‘They showed a repeat of the Manchesterweek. That’s a lot of money!’ United versus Valencia match.’
37.2 Fill the gaps with words from B opposite.
1 Which do you prefer if a film is in a foreign language, to read subtitles or to have the film
d ?
2 I downloaded a great p about bees. I listened to it on my MP3 player in bed last night.
3 I hate it when c interrupt a good film. I usually go and make a cup of tea while they’re on.
4 We’ve got a new s d on our roof. We can r hundreds of
channels now.
5 I’d like a job in the m , perhaps in TV or radio.
6 A lot of people use social networking sites as their main m of communication with
their friends.
7 People often download b from the Internet so they don’tneed to watch them on the
day they are transmitted.
8 Witha fast broadband connection,you can s TV shows directly from the Internet.
37.3 Sort these words into two categories: ‘tabloid’ and ‘quality’ newspaper.
celebrity news complex political debate scandals in-depth reviews of books
competitions and prizes sensational crimes long articles huge headlines
tabloid quality
celebrity news
37.4 Rewrite the words in bold using verbs from the opposite page.
investigated1 The documentary looked into the food industry and emphasised
school meals.
2 The programme was filmed / in Northern Finland. (two answers)
3 CNN sends news programmes around the world.
4 They’re showing the cup final next week. (give a more formal verb)
5 The drama takes place in Paris in the 1880s.
6 Do you ever send those short messages over the Internet about news events?
37.5 Over to you
Which types of media do you use most? Give your reasons.
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 81
