Abbreviations and acronyms78
Abbreviations pronounced as individual lettersA
Most abbreviations are pronounced as individual letters.
Abbreviations for groups or organisations:
BBC British Broadcasting Corporation
CIA Central Intelligence Agency (US government agency collecting information about other countries)
EU European Union
FBI Federal Bureau of Investigation
MI6 Military Intelligence 6 (UK equivalent of CIA)
WHO World Health Organisation
Other abbreviations pronounced as individual letters:
ID Identity (an identity card or passport)
GM genetically modified
DNA deoxyribonucleic acid (chemical at the centre of living cells)
FAQ frequently asked questions
AKA also known as
IOU I owe you
ATM automated teller machine (cash machine usually outside a bank)
ASAP as soon as possible
Language help
When these abbreviations are stressed words in the sentence, the stress falls on the last letter,
e.g. She works for the CIA. I heard it on the BBC.
B Abbreviations pronounced as words
Abbreviations pronounced as individual words are called acronyms.
NATO /neɪtiəʊ/ North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
PIN /pɪn/ Personal Identity Number (e.g. for a bank or credit card)
SAD seasonal affective disorder (lacking energy and enthusiasm in
winter in latitudes where there is little sunlight at that time)
AWOL /eɪwɒl/ absent without leave [permission; usually used in military contexts]
Some acronyms have become so normal as words that people do not think of them as abbreviations
any longer, and so they are not written in capital letters.
laser radar scuba sonar
C Clippings
Some words are often used in an abbreviated form in informal situations. We say, for example, kilo
instead of ‘kilogram’or gig for ‘gigabyte’. Other examples include:
air con (air conditioning) satnav (satellite navigation system)
uni (university) mobile (mobile phone) or (US) cell (cellphone)
carbs (carbohydrates) sci-fi (science fiction) high-tech (high-technology)
D Written abbreviations
Some abbreviations are most frequently used in writing.
PTO Please turn over (turn to the next page)
PS post script (written at the end of a message or letter, when you want to add something else)
RSVP Répondez s’ilvous plaît(French, meaning ‘please answer’)(written at the end of an invitation,
to indicate that you should reply)
RIP Rest in peace (often written on a headstone where someone is buried after they have died)
162 English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate
Exercises
78.1 Match the sentence beginnings on the left with the endings on the right.
c1 Wherever I am in the world I listen to the news on the a ID.
2 Most websites have a page dealing with b PIN.
3 Holly took some money out of my wallet and left me an c BBC.
4 What kind of people we are depends on our d SAD.
5 They won’tlet you into the club without any e FAQs.
6 You won’tbe able to use the ATM if you’ve forgotten your f AWOL.
7 I don’tknow where John can be - he’s gone g DNA.
8 I always feel lethargic in December - I think I suffer from h IOU.
78.2 Find abbreviations from A, B or C opposite to fit these categories.
1 Find two that relate to measurement. kilo gig
2 Find four that relate to food and health.
3 Find three that relate to money.
4 Find one that relates to sport.
5 Find three that are political organisations.
6 Find two that relate to equipment using sound or radio waves.
78.3 Fill each gap with an appropriate abbreviation or acronym.
1 Please could you buy me a kilo of apples?
2 William Barclay James Stubbs has been charged with burglary.
3 The surgeons used technology to carry out the operation.
4 My sister works in a very office using all the most up-to-date hardware and software.
5 Bats cannot see and use a kind of to find their way around.
6 When you’re driving it’s much easier to use a rather than a road atlas.
78.4 Complete the texts with the correct abbreviations from D opposite.
1 2Party! I’ve gone shopping with Ana. Back around six.
At Sam and Beth’s house See you later. Emma
Saturday 14 August Tom phoned for you. Can you call him back?
8 till late
by 28 July
3 4In loving memory of Patients should arrive ten minutes before
James Goodman their appointment time, and must inform
1945 - 2015 their doctor if they are unable to come to an
appointment.
78.5 Over to you
1 What’s the nearest uni to the place where you live?
2 Have you ever tried scuba diving?
3 Would you be happy to eat GM food?
4 Do you know anyone who has SAD?
5 What is the main source of carbs in your diet?
6 How common is air con in your country?
English Vocabulary in Use Upper-intermediate 163
